WITH A LITTLE HELP,
CORY DOCTOROW
**********************************


----------------------------------------
DEDICATION:
-----------

For my friends, past, present and future. No man is an island.

~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-


----------------------------------------
PUBLICATION HISTORY
-------------------

"Introduction," written by Jonathan Coulton for this volume

"The Things that Make Me Weak and Strange Get Engineered Away" originally
published on Tor.com, August 2008

"The Right Book" originally published in /The Bookseller/, June 2008

"Other People's Money" originally published in /Forbes/, November 2007

"Scroogled" originally published in /Radar/, September 2007

"Human Readable" originally published in /Future Washington/, Ernest Lilley,
editor (WSFA Press, 2005)

"Liberation Spectrum" originally published on Salon.com, 2003

"Power Punctuation!" originally published in /Starlight 3/, Patrick Nielsen
Hayden, editor (Tor, 2001)

"Visit the Sins," originally published in /Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine/,
June 1999

"Constitutional Crisis," produced for the Future of the Book Project, 2009

"Pester Power," originally published in /Communications of the Association for
Computing Machinery/, December 2008

"Chicken Little," written for /Gateways,/ forthcoming from Tor Books, 2010

"Epoch," commissioned by Mark Shuttleworth for this volume

"I'm Only In It For the Money," written by Russell Galen for this volume

~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-


----------------------------------------
A NOTE ABOUT TYPOS AND OTHER ERRORS
-----------------------------------

Every book has typos. /Every/ book. But this book is different. This book isn't
perfect, but it /fails well./

If you spot a typo in this book, send it to <walh_typos@craphound.com> (that's
me) and I'll correct it in the electronic editions and in the next copy of the
print-on-demand book that's printed -- nigh-instantaneously.

What's more, as a thank-you, I'll include your name as a footnote on the page
you fixed for me, and at the bottom of the ebooks.

~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-


----------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION BY JONATHAN COULTON
--------------------------------

It turns out the future doesn't really care about space travel. It used to, or
at least when I was growing up all the science fiction I read promised that
space travel would someday be commonplace. That was what made it the future: we
would all be so bored with flying to other planets that we wouldn't even really
talk about it anymore, it would just become a dull backdrop to our daily lives.
There would be aliens, obviously. Probably there would be some sort of
intergalactic governing body, maybe a war involving a trade federation, some
asteroid mines. At the very least, a mission to Mars. But it doesn't seem to be
shaping up that way.

There's always something that science fiction gets charmingly wrong about the
future. The problem is, every now and then there's an unanticipated seismic
shift in the world, something that changes everything and creates a corner we
can't see around. The most recent of these was the potent combination of
digital information and global connectivity that transformed the end of the
20th century. I like to call it "The Internet," and mark my words, it's going
to be very big. The struggling record industry, the death of the newspaper, the
rise of LOLCats - these are just warning shots. Everything is going to get
swallowed up eventually, and it's all going to get loud and messy and
complicated. Forget space travel, this is the future we need to imagine now,
and quickly, before it overtakes us.

Luckily, we have Cory Doctorow; he thinks about the Internet, a lot. And so his
stories are especially compelling because they are so relevant to our immediate
future. "Pester Power" tells us how the Internet has been watching us and
learning, and how it will finally, one day, wake up. "Scroogled" warns us of
what might happen if Google someday decides that yes, actually, they would like
to be evil after all. For a future-lover like me it's easy to get caught up in
rosy visions of a world where we're all connected, and everything is free, and
our in-brain iPods have every Beatles album with all the correct metadata.
Cory's fiction reminds us that we have quite a few thorny issues to sort out
before we get there, not least of which is the question of how people like Cory
are going to make a living when books and publishing companies disappear. But
of course he's thinking about that too.

With a Little Help is an experiment of sorts, an attempt to re-imagine what it
means to publish, market and sell a book. It will be self-published, and like
all of Cory's books it will be released under a Creative Commons license that
allows for non-commercial sharing and remixing. There will be a number of
price-points, ranging from free ebook and audiobook downloads, to
print-on-demand paperbacks, to hardcover special editions with all sorts of
extra goodies. The highest price-point comes with an opportunity to commission
a brand new story based on a mutually agreeable premise (hence, "Epoch").
Throughout the process Cory will hold weekly public production meetings on
Twitter in an effort to share information about the success or failure of these
strategies. The plan combines a lot of different new ideas - audience
participation, free culture, long tail economics - and it will test a few
hypotheses about what it might mean to be an author in the future. It's a
shotgun approach to innovation; as the old business models become quaint
antiques from a not-so-distant past, sometimes the best way forward is simply
to try a bunch of stuff and see what works.

At least, that was my theory when I finally decided to become a full-time
musician. I had spent years avoiding a career in the music business because it
seemed impossible. How do people discover you if you're not famous? And how do
you get famous if nobody ever discovers you? Then I heard about Creative
Commons, a brilliant licensing hack that sits on top of the complicated and
antiquated copyright system. It allows creators to specify ahead of time what
sorts of uses they'd like to allow for the things they create. For me and for
Cory this means allowing people to share our work freely, and to re-use it to
create new things. The first time the concept was explained to me I felt as
though someone had set my brain on fire - it was the most exciting idea I had
ever heard.

In my head, songs became little autonomous vehicles that I could release into
the wild, letting them bounce around and find their way to the people who would
enjoy them. It was a way to let this new "Internet" thing do all the heavy
lifting, an organic and efficient method of targeting an audience of fans who
did not yet know they were fans. On top of that, it was a perfect expression of
what I had always felt about art, this idea that everything ever created owes
its existence to something that came before. To be sure, there is a boundary
between inspiration and theft, but it's a thick and mushy one. When we create,
we borrow, we build, we steal. Declaring my intentions to allow this sort of
thing, indeed to encourage it, made perfect sense. I didn't have it all figured
out, but I started licensing my music with Creative Commons that very day. It
became the first piece of the puzzle, and it remains an essential component of
the mysterious machinery that now allows me to make my living as a musician. It
was just one of those ideas that resonated, the buzzing end of a long wire
stretching off into the distance, perhaps even around a corner or two.

Speaking of which, it's not unreasonable to ask: as a science fiction author,
what is it that Cory is getting wrong about the future? What is the corner that
he can't see around? Certainly there's something big coming, and we'll know it
once we've gotten past it. But until then, we've got our own rather sharp
corner to turn, and we're just now getting a glimpse of some of the possible
futures that might be in store for us. Here in the real world, where constant
change seems to be the new status quo, he's hedging against what we don't know,
not just thinking about the future, but trying to take us there.

~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-


----------------------------------------
THE THINGS THAT MAKE ME WEAK AND STRANGE GET ENGINEERED AWAY
------------------------------------------------------------

"Cause it's gonna be the future soon,
"And I won't always be this way,
"When the things that make me weak and strange get engineered away"

-Jonathan Coulton, The Future Soon

Batman's cubicle was just the right place to chew on a thorny logfile
problem: decorated with the votive fetishes of his monastic order, a thousand
calming, clarifying mandalas and saints devoted to helping him think clearly.

From the nearby cubicles, Batman heard the ritualized muttering of a thousand
brothers and sisters in the Order of Reflective Analytics, a susurration of
harmonized, concentrated thought. On his display, he watched an instrument
widget track the decibel level over time, the graph overlayed on a 3D curve of
normal activity over time and space. He noted that the level was a little high,
the room a little more anxious than usual.

He clicked and tapped and thought some more, massaging the logfile to see if he
could make it snap into focus and make sense, but it stubbornly refused to be
sensible. The data tracked the custody chain of the bitstream the Order munged
for the Securitat, and somewhere in there, a file had grown by 68 bytes,
blowing its checksum and becoming An Anomaly.

Order lore was filled with Anomalies, loose threads in the fabric of reality --
bugs to be squashed in the data-set that was the Order's universe. Starting
with the pre-Order sysadmin who'd tracked a $0.75 billing anomaly back to a
foreign spy-ring that was using his systems to hack his military, these
morality tales were object lessons to the Order's monks: pick at the seams and
the world will unravel in useful and interesting ways.

Batman had reached the end of his personal picking capacity, though. It was
time to talk it over with Gerta.

He stood up and walked away from his cubicle, touching his belt to let his
sensor array know that he remembered it was there. It counted his steps and his
heartbeats and his EEG spikes as he made his way out into the compound.

It's not like Gerta was in charge -- the Order worked in autonomous little
units with rotating leadership, all coordinated by some groupware that let them
keep the hierarchy nice and flat, the way that they all liked it. Authority
sucked.

But once you instrument every keystroke, every click, every erg of
productivity, it soon becomes apparent who knows her shit and who just doesn't.
Gerta knew the shit cold.

"Question," he said, walking up to her. She liked it brusque. No nonsense.

She batted her handball against the court wall three more times, making long
dives for it, sweaty grey hair whipping back and forth, body arcing in graceful
flows. Then she caught the ball and tossed it into the basket by his feet.
"Batman, huh? All right, surprise me."

"It's this," he said, and tossed the file at her pan. She caught it with the
same fluid gesture and her computer gave it to her on the handball court wall,
which was the closest display for which she controlled the lockfile. She peered
at the data, spinning the graph this way and that, peering intently.

She pulled up some of her own instruments and replayed the bitstream, recalling
the logfiles from many network taps from the moment at which the file grew by
the anomalous 68 bytes.

"You think it's an Anomaly, don't you?" She had a fine blond mustache that was
beaded with sweat, but her breathing had slowed to normal and her hands were
steady and sure as she gestured at the wall.

"I was kind of hoping, yeah. Good opportunity for personal growth, your
Anomalies."

"Easy to say why you'd call it an Anomaly, but look at this." She pulled the
checksum of the injected bytes, then showed him her network taps, which were
playing the traffic back and forth for several minutes before and after the
insertion. The checksummed block moved back through the routers, one hop, two
hops, three hops, then to a terminal. The authentication data for the terminal
told them who owned its lockfile then: Zbigniew Krotoski, login zbigkrot. Gerta
grabbed his room number.

"Now, we don't have the actual payload, of course, because that gets flushed.
But we have the checksum, we have the username, and look at this, we have him
typing 68 unspecified bytes in a pattern consistent with his biometrics five
minutes and eight seconds prior to the injection. So, let's go ask him what his
68 characters were and why they got added to the Securitat's data-stream."

He led the way, because he knew the corner of the campus where zbigkrot worked
pretty well, having lived there for five years when he first joined the Order.
Zbigkrot was probably a relatively recent inductee, if he was still in that
block.

His belt gave him a reassuring buzz to let him know he was being logged as he
entered the building, softer haptic feedback coming as he was logged to each
floor as they went up the clean-swept wooden stairs. Once, he'd had the
work-detail of re-staining those stairs, stripping the ancient wood, sanding it
baby-skin smooth, applying ten coats of varnish, polishing it to a high gloss.
The work had been incredible, painful and rewarding, and seeing the stairs
still shining gave him a tangible sense of satisfaction.

He knocked at zbigkrot's door twice before entering. Technically, any brother
or sister was allowed to enter any room on the campus, though there were norms
of privacy and decorum that were far stronger than any law or rule.

The room was bare, every last trace of its occupant removed. A fine dust
covered every surface, swirling in clouds as they took a few steps in. They
both coughed explosively and stepped back, slamming the door.

"Skin," Gerta croaked. "Collected from the ventilation filters. DNA for every
person on campus, in a nice, even, Gaussian distribution. Means we can't use
biometrics to figure out who was in this room before it was cleaned out."

Batman tasted the dust in his mouth and swallowed his gag reflex.
Technically, he knew that he was always inhaling and ingesting other people's
dead skin-cells, but not by the mouthful.

"All right," Gerta said. "/Now/ you've got an Anomaly. Congrats, Batman.
Personal growth awaits you."

#

The campus only had one entrance to the wall that surrounded it. "Isn't that a
fire-hazard?" Batman asked the guard who sat in the pillbox at the gate.

"Naw," the man said. He was old, with the serene air of someone who'd been in
the Order for decades. His beard was combed and shining, plaited into a thick
braid that hung to his belly, which had only the merest hint of a little pot.
"Comes a fire, we hit the panic button, reverse the magnets lining the walls,
and the foundations destabilize at twenty sections. The whole thing'd come down
in seconds. But no one's going to sneak in or out that way."

"I did /not/ know that," Batman said.

"Public record, of course. But pretty obscure. Too tempting to a certain
prankster mindset."

Batman shook his head. "Learn something new every day."

The guard made a gesture that caused something to depressurize in the gateway.
A primed /hum/ vibrated through the floorboards. "We keep the inside of the
vestibule at 10 atmospheres, and it opens inward from outside. No one can force
that door open without us knowing about it in a pretty dramatic way."

"But it must take forever to re-pressurize?"

"Not many people go in and out. Just data."

Batman patted himself down.

"You got everything?"

"Do I seem nervous to you?"

The old timer picked up his tea and sipped at it. "You'd be an idiot if you
weren't. How long since you've been out?"

"Not since I came in. Sixteen years ago. I was twenty one."

"Yeah," the old timer said. "Yeah, you'd be an idiot if you weren't nervous.
You follow politics?"

"Not my thing," Batman said. "I know it's been getting worse out there --"

The old timer barked a laugh. "Not your thing? It's probably time you got out
into the wide world, son. You might ignore politics, but it won't ignore
/you/."

"Is it dangerous?"

"You going armed?"

"I didn't know that was an option."

"Always an option. But not a smart one. Any weapon you don't know how to use
belongs to your enemy. Just be circumspect. Listen before you talk. Watch
before you act. They're good people out there, but they're in a bad, bad
situation."

Batman shuffled his feet and shifted the straps of his bindle. "You're not
making me very comfortable with all this, you know."

"Why are you going out anyway?"

"It's an Anomaly. My first. I've been waiting sixteen years for this. Someone
poisoned the Securitat's data and left the campus. I'm going to go ask him why
he did it."

The old man blew the gate. The heavy door lurched open, revealing the
vestibule. "Sounds like an Anomaly all right." He turned away and Batman
forced himself to move toward the vestibule. The man held his hand out before
he reached it. "You haven't been outside in sixteen years, it's going to be a
surprise. Just remember, we're a noble species, all appearances to the contrary
notwithstanding."

Then he gave Batman a little shove that sent him into the vestibule. The door
slammed behind him. The vestibule smelled like machine oil and rubber, gaskety
smells. It was dimly lit by rows of white LEDs that marched up the walls like
drunken ants. Batman barely had time to register this before he heard a loud
/thunk/ from the outer door and it swung away.

#

Batman walked down the quiet street, staring up at the same sky he'd lived
under, breathing the same air he'd always breathed, but marveling at how
/different/ it all was. His heartbeat and respiration were up -- the tips of
the first two fingers on his right hand itched slightly under his feedback
gloves -- and his thoughts were doing that race-condition thing where every
time he tried to concentrate on something he thought about how he was trying to
concentrate on something and should stop thinking about how he was
concentrating and just concentrate.

This was how it had been sixteen years before, when he'd gone into the Order.
He'd been so /angry/ all the time then. Sitting in front of his keyboard,
looking at the world through the lens of the network, suffering all the fools
with poor grace. He'd been a bright 14 year old, a genius at 16, a rising star
at 18, and a failure by 21. He was depressed all the time, his weight had
ballooned to nearly 300 pounds, and he had been fired three times in two years.

One day he stood up from his desk at work -- he'd just been hired at a company
that was selling learning, trainable vision-systems for analyzing images, who
liked him because he'd retained his security clearance when he'd been fired
from his previous job -- and walked out of the building. It had been a blowing,
wet, grey day, and the streets of New York were as empty as they ever got.

Standing on Sixth Avenue, looking north from midtown, staring at the buildings
the cars and the buses and the people and the tallwalkers, that's when he had
his realization: /He was not meant to be in this world./

It just didn't suit him. He could /see/ its workings, see how its politics and
policies were flawed, see how the system needed debugging, see what made its
people work, but he couldn't touch it. Every time he reached in to adjust its
settings, he got mangled by its gears. He couldn't convince his bosses that he
knew what they were doing wrong. He couldn't convince his colleagues that he
knew best. Nothing he did succeeded -- every attempt he made to right the
wrongs of the world made him miserable and made everyone else angry.

Batman knew about humans, so he knew about this: this was the exact profile
of the people in the Order. Normally he would have taken the subway home. It
was forty blocks to his place, and he didn't get around so well anymore. Plus
there was the rain and the wind.

But today, he walked, huffing and limping, using his cane more and more as he
got further and further uptown, his knee complaining with each step. He got to
his apartment and found that the elevator was out of service -- second time
that month -- and so he took the stairs. He arrived at his apartment so out of
breath he felt like he might vomit.

He stood in the doorway, clutching the frame, looking at his sofa and table,
the piles of books, the dirty dishes from that morning's breakfast in the
little sink. He'd watched a series of short videos about the Order once, and
he'd been struck by the little monastic cells each member occupied, so neat, so
tidy, everything in its perfect place, serene and thoughtful.

So unlike his place.

He didn't bother to lock the door behind him when he left. They said New York
was the burglary capital of the developed world, but he didn't know anyone
who'd been burgled. If the burglars came, they were welcome to everything they
could carry away and the landlord could take the rest. He was not meant to be
in this world.

He walked back out into the rain and, what the hell, hailed a cab, and, hail
mary, one stopped when he put his hand out. The cabbie grunted when he said he
was going to Staten Island, but, what the hell, he pulled three twenties out of
his wallet and slid them through the glass partition. The cabbie put the pedal
down. The rain sliced through the Manhattan canyons and battered the windows
and they went over the Verrazano bridge and he said goodbye to his life and the
outside world forever, seeking a world he could be a part of.

Or at least, that's how he felt, as his heart swelled with the drama of it all.
But the truth was much less glamorous. The brothers who admitted him at the
gate were cheerful and a little weird, like his co-workers, and he didn't get a
nice clean cell to begin with, but a bunk in a shared room and a detail helping
to build more quarters. And they didn't leave his stuff for the burglars --
someone from the Order went and cleaned out his place and put his stuff in a
storage locker on campus, made good with his landlord and so on. By the time it
was all over, it all felt a little...ordinary. But in a good way, Ordinary was
good. It had been a long time since he'd felt ordinary. Order, ordinary. They
went together. He needed ordinary.

#

The Securitat van played a cheerful engine-tone as it zipped down the street
towards him. It looked like a children's drawing -- a perfect little electrical
box with two seats in front and a meshed-in lockup in the rear. It accelerated
smoothly down the street towards him, then braked perfectly at his toes,
rocking slightly on its suspension as its doors gull-winged up.

"Cool!" he said, involuntarily, stepping back to admire the smart little car.
He reached for the lifelogger around his neck and aimed it at the two Securitat
officers who were debarking, moving with stiff grace in their armor. As he
raised the lifelogger, the officer closest to him reached out with serpentine
speed and snatched it out of his hands, power-assisted fingers coming together
on it with a loud, plasticky /crunk/ as the device shattered into a rain of
fragments. Just as quickly, the other officer had come around the vehicle and
seized Batman's wrists, bringing them together in a painful, machine-assisted
grip.

The one who had crushed his lifelogger passed his palms over Batman's chest,
arms and legs, holding them a few millimeters away from him. Batman's pan
went nuts, intrusion detection sensors reporting multiple hostile reads of his
identifiers, millimeter-wave radar scans, HERF attacks, and assorted
shenanigans. All his feedback systems went to full alert, going from itchy,
back-of-the-neck liminal sensations into high intensity pinches, prods and
buzzes. It was a deeply alarming sensation, like his internal organs were under
attack.

He choked out an incoherent syllable, and the Securitat man who was
hand-wanding him raised a warning finger, holding it so close to his nose he
went cross-eyed. He fell silent while the man continued to wand him, twitching
a little to let his pan know that it was all OK.

"From the cult, then, are you?" the Securitat man said, after he'd kicked
Batman's ankles apart and spread his hands on the side of the truck.

"That's right," Batman said. "From the Order." He jerked his head toward the
gates, just a few tantalizing meters away. "I'm out --"

"You people are really something, you know that? You could have been /killed/.
Let me tell you a few things about how the world works: when you are approached
by the Securitat, you stand still with your hands stretched straight out to
either side. You do /not/ raise unidentified devices and point them at the
officers. Not unless you're trying to commit suicide by cop. Is that what
you're trying to do?"

"No," Batman said. "No, of course not. I was just taking a picture for --"

"And you do /not/ photograph or log our security procedures. There's a war on,
you know." The man's forehead bunched together. "Oh, for shit's sake. We should
take you in now, you know it? Tie up a dozen people's day, just to process you
through the system. You could end up in a cell for, oh, I don't know, a month.
You want that?"

"Of course not," Batman said. "I didn't realize --"

"You didn't, but you /should have/. If you're going to come walking around here
where the real people are, you have to learn how to behave like a real person
in the real world."

The other man, who had been impassively holding Batman's wrists in a crushing
grip, eased up. "Let him go?" he said.

The first officer shook his head. "If I were you, I would turn right around,
walk through those gates, and never come out again. Do I make myself clear?"

Batman wasn't clear at all. Was the cop ordering him to go back? Or just
giving him advice? Would he be arrested if he didn't go back in? It had been a
long time since Batman had dealt with authority and the feeling wasn't a good
one. His chest heaved, and sweat ran down his back, pooling around his ass,
then moving in rivulets down the backs of his legs.

"I understand," he said. Thinking: /I understand that asking questions now
would not be a good idea/.

#

The subway was more or less as he remembered it, though the long line of people
waiting to get through the turnstiles turned out to be a line to go through a
security checkpoint, complete with bag-search and X-ray. But the New Yorkers
were the same -- no one made eye contact with anyone else, but if they did,
everyone shared a kind of bitter shrug, as if to say, /Ain't it the fuckin'
truth?/

But the smell was the same -- oil and damp and bleach and the indefinable,
human smell of a place where millions had passed for decades, where millions
would pass for decades to come. He found himself standing before a subway map,
looking at it, comparing it to the one in his memory to find the changes, the
new stations that must have sprung up during his hiatus from reality.

But there weren't new stations. In fact, it seemed to him that there were a lot
/fewer/ stations -- hadn't there been one at Bleeker Street and another at
Cathedral Parkway? Yes, there had been -- but look now, they were gone, and...
And there were stickers, white stickers over the places where the stations had
been. He reached up and touched the one over Bleeker Street.

"I still can't get used to it, either," said a voice at his side. "I used to
change for the F Train there every day when I was a kid." It was a woman, about
the same age as Gerta, but more beaten down by the years, deeper creases in her
face, a stoop in her stance. But her face was kind, her eyes soft.

"What happened to it?"

She took a half-step back from him. "Bleeker Street," she said. "You know,
Bleeker Street? Like 9/11? Bleeker Street?" Like the name of the station was an
incantation.

It rang a bell. It wasn't like he didn't ever read the news, but it had a way
of sliding off of you when you were on campus, as though it was some historical
event in a book, not something happening right there, on the other side of the
wall.

"I'm sorry," he said. "I've been away. Bleeker Street, yes, of course."

She gave him a squinty stare. "You must have been /very/ far away."

He tried out a sheepish grin. "I'm a monk," he said. "From the Order of
Reflective Analytics. I've been out of the world for sixteen years. Until
today, in fact. My name is Batman." He stuck his hand out and she shook it
like it was made of china.

"A monk," she said. "That's very interesting. Well, you enjoy your little
vacation." She turned on her heel and walked quickly down the platform. He
watched her for a moment, then turned back to the map, counting the missing
stations.

#

When the train ground to a halt in the tunnel between 42nd and 50th street, the
entire car let out a collective groan. When the lights flickered and went out,
they groaned louder. The emergency lights came on in sickly green and an
incomprehensible announcement played over the loudspeakers. Evidently, it was
an order to evacuate, because the press of people began to struggle through the
door at the front of the car, then further and further. Batman let the press
of bodies move him too.

Once they reached the front of the train, they stepped down onto the tracks,
each passenger turning silently to help the next, again with that /Ain't it the
fuckin' truth?/ look. Batman turned to help the person behind him and saw
that it was the woman who'd spoken to him on the platform. She smiled a little
smile at him and turned with practiced ease to help the person behind her.

They walked single file on a narrow walkway beside the railings. Securitat
officers were strung out at regular intervals, wearing night scopes and high,
rubberized boots. They played flashlights over the walkers as they evacuated.

"Does this happen often?" Batman said over his shoulder. His words were
absorbed by the dead subterranean air and he thought that she might not have
heard him but then she sighed.

"Only every time there's an anomaly in the head-count -- when the system says
there's too many or too few people in the trains. Maybe once a week." He could
feel her staring at the back of his head. He looked back at her and saw her
shaking her head. He stumbled and went down on one knee, clanging his head
against the stone walls made soft by a fur of condensed train exhaust, cobwebs
and dust.

She helped him to his feet. "You don't seem like a snitch, Batman. But you're
a monk. Are you going to turn me in for being suspicious?"

He took a second to parse this out. "I don't work for the Securitat," he said.
It seemed like the best way to answer.

She snorted. "That's not what we hear. Come on, they're going to start shouting
at us if we don't move."

They walked the rest of the way to an emergency staircase together, and emerged
out of a sidewalk grating, blinking in the remains of the autumn sunlight, a
bloody color on the glass of the highrises. She looked at him and made a face.
"You're filthy, Batman." She thumped at his sleeves and great dirty clouds
rose off them. He looked down at the knees of his pants and saw that they were
hung with boogers of dust.

The New Yorkers who streamed past them ducked to avoid the dirty clouds. "Where
can I clean up?" he said.

"Where are you staying?"

"I was thinking I'd see about getting a room at the Y or a backpacker's hostel,
somewhere to stay until I'm done."

"Done?"

"I'm on a complicated errand. Trying to locate someone who used to be in the
Order."

Her face grew hard again. "No one gets out alive, huh?"

He felt himself blushing. "It's not like that. Wow, you've got strange ideas
about us. I want to find this guy because he disappeared under mysterious
circumstances and I want to --" How to explain Anomalies to an outsider? "It's
a thing we do. Unravel mysteries. It makes us better people."

"Better people?" She snorted again. "Better than what? Don't answer. Come on, I
live near here. You can wash up at my place and be on your way. You're not
going to get into any backpacker's hostel looking like you just crawled out of
a sewer -- you're more likely to get detained for being an 'indigent of
suspicious character.'"

He let her steer him a few yards uptown. "You think that I work for the
Securitat but you're inviting me into your home?"

She shook her head and led him around a corner, along a long crosstown block,
and then turned back uptown. "No," she said. "I think you're a confused
stranger who is apt to get himself into some trouble if someone doesn't take
you in hand and help you get smart, fast. It doesn't cost me anything to lend a
hand, and you don't seem like the kind of guy who'd mug, rape and kill an old
lady."

#

"The discipline," he said, "is all about keeping track of the way that the
world is, and comparing it to your internal perceptions, all the time. When I
entered the Order, I was really big. Fat, I mean. The discipline made me log
every bit of food I ate, and I discovered a few important things: first, I was
eating about 20 times a day, just grazing on whatever happened to be around.
Second, that I was consuming about 4,000 calories a day, mostly in industrial
sugars like high-fructose corn syrup. Just /knowing/ how I ate made a gigantic
difference. I felt like I ate sensibly, always ordering a salad with lunch and
dinner, but I missed the fact that I was glooping on half a cup of sweetened,
high-fat dressing, and having a cookie or two every hour between lunch and
dinner, and a half-pint of ice-cream before bed most nights.

"But it wasn't just food -- in the Order, we keep track of /everything/; our
typing patterns, our sleeping patterns, our moods, our reading habits. I
discovered that I read faster when I've been sleeping more, so now, when I need
to really get through a lot of reading, I make sure I sleep more. Used to be
I'd try to stay up all night with pots of coffee to get the reading done. Of
course, the more sleep-deprived I was, the slower I read; and the slower I read
the more I needed to stay up to catch up with the reading. No wonder college
was such a blur.

"So that's why I've stayed. It's empiricism, it's as old as Newton, as the
Enlightenment." He took another sip of his water, which tasted like New York
tap water had always tasted (pretty good, in fact), and which he hadn't tasted
for sixteen years. The woman was called Posy, and her old leather sofa was worn
but well-loved, and smelled of saddle soap. She was watching him from a kitchen
chair she'd brought around to the living room of the tiny apartment, rubbing
her stockinged feet over the good wool carpet that showed a few old stains
hiding beneath strategically placed furnishings and knick-knacks.

He had to tell her the rest, of course. You couldn't understand the Order
unless you understood the rest. "I'm a screwup, Posy. Or at least, I was. We
all were. Smart and motivated and promising, but just a wretched person to be
around. Angry, bitter, all those smarts turned on biting the heads off of the
people who were dumb enough to care about me or employ me. And so smart that I
could talk myself into believing that it was all everyone else's fault, the
idiots. It took instrumentation, empiricism, to get me to understand the
patterns of my own life, to master my life, to become the person I wanted to
be."

"Well, you seem like a perfectly nice young man now," Posy said.

That was clearly his cue to go, and he'd changed into a fresh set of trousers,
but he couldn't go, not until he picked apart something she'd said earlier.
"Why did you think I was a snitch?"

"I think you know that very well, Batman," she said. "I can't imagine someone
who's so into measuring and understanding the world could possibly have missed
it."

/Now/ he knew what she was talking about. "We just do contract work for the
Securitat. It's just one of the ways the Order sustains itself." The founders
had gone into business refilling toner cartridges, which was like the 21st
century equivalent of keeping bees or brewing dark, thick beer. They'd branched
out into remote IT administration, then into data-mining and security, which
was a natural for people with Order training. "But it's all anonymized. We
don't snitch on people. We report on anomalous events. We do it for lots of
different companies, too -- not just the Securitat."

Posy walked over to the window behind her small dining room table, rolling away
a couple of handsome old chairs on castors to reach it. She looked down over
the billion lights of Manhattan, stretching all the way downtown to Brooklyn.
She motioned to him to come over, and he squeezed in beside her. They were on
the twenty-third floor, and it had been many years since he'd stood this high
and looked down. The world is different from high up.

"There," she said, pointing at an apartment building across the way. "There,
you see it? With the broken windows?" He saw it, the windows covered in
cardboard. "They took them away last week. I don't know why. You never know
why. You become a person of interest and they take you away and then later,
they always find a reason to keep you away."

Batman's hackles were coming up. He found stuff that didn't belong in the
data -- he didn't arrest people. "So if they always find a reason to keep you
away, doesn't that mean --"

She looked like she wanted to slap him and he took a step back. "We're all
guilty of something, Batman. That's how the game is rigged. Look closely at
anyone's life and you'll find, what, a little black-marketeering, a copyright
infringement, some cash economy business with unreported income, something
obscene in your Internet use, something in your bloodstream that shouldn't be
there. I bought that sofa from a /cop/, Batman, bought it ten years ago when
he was leaving the building. He didn't give me a receipt and didn't collect
tax, and technically that makes us offenders." She slapped the radiator. "I
overrode the governor on this ten minutes after they installed it. Everyone
does it. They make it easy -- you just stick a penny between two contacts and
hey presto, the city can't turn your heat down anymore. They wouldn't make it
so easy if they didn't expect everyone to do it -- and once everyone's done it,
we're all guilty.

"The people across the street, they were Pakistani or maybe Sri Lankan or
Bangladeshi. I'd see the wife at the service laundry. Nice professional lady,
always lugging around a couple kids on their way to or from day-care. She --"
Posy broke off and stared again. "I once saw her reach for her change and her
sleeve rode up and there was a number tattooed there, there on her wrist." Posy
shuddered. "When they took her and her husband and their kids, she stood at the
window and pounded at it and screamed for help. You could hear her from here."

"That's terrible," Batman said. "But what does it have to do with the Order?"

She sat back down. "For someone who is supposed to know himself, you're not
very good at connecting the dots."

Batman stood up. He felt an obscure need to apologize. Instead, he thanked
her and put his glass in the sink. She shook his hand solemnly.

"Take care out there," she said. "Good luck finding your escapee."

#

Here's what Batman knew about Zbigniew Krotoski. He had been inducted into
the Order four years earlier. He was a native-born New Yorker. He had spent his
first two years in the Order trying to coax some of the elders into a variety
of pointless flamewars about the ethics of working for the Securitat, and then
had settled into being a very productive member. He spent his 20 percent time
-- the time when each monk had to pursue non-work-related projects -- building
aerial photography rigs out of box-kites and tiny cameras that the Monks
installed on their systems to help them monitor their body mechanics and
ergonomic posture.

Zbigkrot performed in the eighty-fifth percentile of the Order, which was
respectable enough. Batman had started there and had crept up and down as low
as 70 and as high as 88, depending on how he was doing in the rest of his life.
Zbigkrot was active in the gardens, both the big ones where they grew their
produce and a little allotment garden where he indulged in baroque
cross-breeding experiments, which were in vogue among the monks then.

The Securitat stream to which he'd added 68 bytes was long gone, but it was the
kind of thing that the Order handled on a routine basis: given the timing and
other characteristics, Batman thought it was probably a stream of purchase
data from hardware and grocery stores, to be inspected for unusual patterns
that might indicate someone buying bomb ingredients. Zbigkrot had worked on
this kind of data thousands of times before, six times just that day. He'd
added the sixty-eight bytes and then left.

Zbigkrot once had a sister in New York -- that much could be ascertained. Anja
Krotoski had lived on 23d Street in a co-op near Lexington. But that had been
four years previous, when he'd joined the Order, and she wasn't there anymore.
Her numbers all rang dead.

The apartment building had once been a pleasant, middle-class sort of place,
with a red awning and a niche for a doorman. Now it had become more run down,
the awning's edges frayed, one pane of lobby glass broken out and replaced with
a sheet of cardboard. The doorman was long gone.

It seemed to Batman that this fate had befallen many of the City's buildings.
They reminded him of the buildings he'd seen in Belgrade one time, when he'd
been sent out to brief a gang of outsource programmers his boss had hired --
neglected for years, indifferently patched by residents who had limited access
to materials.

It was the dinner hour, and a steady trickle of people were letting themselves
into Anja's old building. Batman watched a couple of them enter the building
and noticed something wonderful and sad: as they approached the building, their
faces were the hard masks of city-dwellers, not meeting anyone's eye, clipping
along at a fast pace that said, "Don't screw with me." But once they passed the
threshold of their building and the door closed behind them, their whole affect
changed. They slumped, they smiled at one another, they leaned against the
mailboxes and set down their bags and took off their hats and fluffed their
hair and turned back into people.

He remembered that feeling from his life before, the sense of having two faces:
the one he showed to the world and the one that he reserved for home. In the
Order, he only wore one face, one that he knew in exquisite detail.

He approached the door now, and his pan started to throb ominously, letting him
know that he was enduring hostile probes. The building wanted to know who he
was and what business he had there, and it was attempting to fingerprint
everything about him from his pan to his gait to his face.

He took up a position by the door and dialed back the pan's response to a dull
pulse. He waited for a few minutes until one of the residents came down: a
middle-aged man with a dog, a little sickly-looking schnauzer with grey in its
muzzle.

"Can I help you?" the man said, from the other side of the security door, not
unlatching it.

"I'm looking for Anja Krotoski," he said. "I'm trying to track down her
brother."

The man looked him up and down. "Please step away from the door."

He took a few steps back. "Does Ms Krotoski still live here?"

The man considered. "I'm sorry, sir, I can't help you." He waited for Batman
to react.

"You don't know, or you can't help me?"

"Don't wait under this awning. The police come if anyone waits under this
awning for more than three minutes."

The man opened the door and walked away with his dog.

#

His phone rang before the next resident arrived. He cocked his head to answer
it, then remembered that his lifelogger was dead and dug in his jacket for a
mic. There was one at his wrist pulse-points used by the health array. He
unvelcroed it and held it to his mouth.

"Hello?"

"It's Gerta, boyo. Wanted to know how your Anomaly was going."

"Not good," he said. "I'm at the sister's place and they don't want to talk to
me."

"You're walking up to strangers and asking them about one of their neighbors,
huh?"

He winced. "Put it that way, yeah, OK, I understand why this doesn't work. But
Gerta, I feel like Rip Van Winkle here. I keep putting my foot in it. It's so
different."

"People are people, Batman. Every bad behavior and every good one lurks
within us. They were all there when you were in the world -- in different
proportion, with different triggers. But all there. You know yourself very
well. Can you observe the people around you with the same keen attention?"

He felt slightly put upon. "That's what I'm trying --"

"Then you'll get there eventually. What, you're in a hurry?"

Well, no. He didn't have any kind of timeline. Some people chased Anomalies for
/years/. But truth be told, he wanted to get out of the City and back onto
campus. "I'm thinking of coming back to Campus to sleep."

Gerta clucked. "Don't give in to the agoraphobia, Batman. Hang in there. You
haven't even heard my news yet, and you're already ready to give up?"

"What news? And I'm not giving up, just want to sleep in my own bed --"

"The entry checkpoints, Batman. You cannot do this job if you're going to
spend four hours a day in security queues. Anyway, the news.

"It wasn't the first time he did it. I've been running the logs back three
years and I've found at least a dozen streams that he tampered with. Each time
he used a different technique. This was the first time we caught him. Used some
pretty subtle tripwires when he did it, so he'd know if anyone ever caught on.
Must have spent his whole life living on edge, waiting for that moment, waiting
to bug out. Must have been a hard life."

"What was he doing? Spying?"

"Most assuredly," Gerta said. "But for whom? For the enemy? The Securitat?"

They'd considered going to the Securitat with the information, but why bother?
The Order did business with the Securitat, but tried never to interact with
them on any other terms. The Securitat and the Order had an implicit
understanding: so long as the Order was performing excellent data-analysis, it
didn't have to fret the kind of overt scrutiny that prevailed in the real
world. Undoubtedly, the Securitat kept satellite eyes, data-snoopers, wiretaps,
millimeter radar and every other conceivable surveillance trained on each
Campus in the world, but at the end of the day, they were just badly socialized
geeks who'd left the world, and useful geeks at that. The Securitat treated the
Order the way that Batman's old bosses treated the company sysadmins:
expendable geeks who no one cared about -- so long as nothing went wrong.

No, there was no sense in telling the Securitat about the 68 bytes.

"Why would the Securitat poison its own data-streams?"

"You know that when the Soviets pulled out of Finland, they found 40
/kilometers/ of wire-tapping wire in KGB headquarters? The building was only 12
storeys tall! Spying begets spying. The worst, most dangerous enemy the
Securitat has is the Securitat."

There were Securitat vans on the street around him, going past every now and
again, eerily silent engines, playing their cheerful music. He stepped back
into shadow, then thought better of it and stood under a pool of light.

"OK, so it was a habit. How do I find him? No one in the sister's building will
talk to me."

"You need to put them at their ease. Tell them the truth, that often works."

"You know how people feel about the Order out here?" He thought of Posy. "I
don't know if the truth is going to work here."

"You've been in the Order for sixteen years. You're not just some
fumble-tongued outcast anymore. Go talk to them."

"But --"

"Go, Batman. Go. You're a smart guy, you'll figure it out."

He went. Residents were coming home every few minutes now, carrying grocery
bags, walking dogs, or dragging their tired feet. He almost approached a young
woman, then figured that she wouldn't want to talk to a strange man on the
street at night. He picked a guy in his thirties, wearing jeans and a huge old
vintage coat that looked like it had come off the eastern front.

"Scuse me," he said. "I'm trying to find someone who used to live here."

The guy stopped and looked Batman up and down. He had a handsome sweater on
underneath his coat, design-y and cosmopolitan, the kind of thing that made
Batman think of Milan or Paris. Batman was keenly aware of his generic
Order-issued suit, a brown, rumpled, ill-fitting thing, topped with a polymer
coat that, while warm, hardly flattered.

"Good luck with that," he said, then started to move past.

"Please," Batman said. "I'm -- I'm not used to how things are around here.
There's probably some way I could ask you this that would put you at your ease,
but I don't know what it is. I'm not good with people. But I really need to
find this person, she used to live here."

The man stopped, looked at him again. He seemed to recognize something in
Batman, or maybe it was that he was disarmed by Batman's honesty.

"Why would you want to do that?"

"It's a long story," he said. "Basically, though: I'm a monk from the Order of
Reflective Analytics and one of our guys has disappeared. His sister used to
live here -- maybe she still does -- and I wanted to ask her if she knew where
I could find him."

"Let me guess, none of my neighbors wanted to help you."

"You're only the second guy I've asked, but yeah, pretty much."

"Out here in the real world, we don't really talk about each other to
strangers. Too much like being a snitch. Lucky for you, my sister's in the
Order, out in Oregon, so I know you're not all a bunch of snoops and stoolies.
Who're you looking for?"

Batman felt a rush of gratitude for this man. "Anja Krotoski, number 11-J?"

"Oh," the man said. "Well, yeah, I can see why you'd have a hard time with the
neighbors when it comes to old Anja. She was well-liked around here, before she
went."

"Where'd she go? When?"

"What's your name, friend?"

"Batman."

"Batman, Anja /went/. Middle of the night kind of thing. No one heard a
thing. The CCTVs stopped working that night. Nothing on the drive the next day.
No footage at all."

"Like she skipped out?"

"They stopped delivering flyers to her door. There's only one power stronger
than direct marketing."

"The Securitat took her?"

"That's what we figured. Nothing left in her place. Not a stick of furniture.
We don't talk about it much. Not the thing that it pays to take an interest
in."

"How long ago?"

"Two years ago," he said. A few more residents pushed past them. "Listen, I
approve of what you people do in there, more or less. It's good that there's a
place for the people who don't -- you know, who don't have a place out here.
But the way you make your living. I told my sister about this, the last time
she visited, and she got very angry with me. She didn't see the difference
between watching yourself and being watched."

Batman nodded. "Well, that's true enough. We don't draw a really sharp
distinction. We all get to see one another's stats. It keeps us honest."

"That's fine, if you have the choice. But --" He broke off, looking
self-conscious. Batman reminded himself that they were on a public street,
the cameras on them, people passing by. Was one of them a snitch? The Securitat
had talked about putting him away for a month, just for logging them. They
could watch him all they wanted, but he couldn't look at them.

"I see the point." He sighed. He was cold and it was full autumn dark now. He
still didn't have a room for the night and he didn't have any idea how he'd
find Anja, much less zbigkrot. He began to understand why Anomalies were such a
big deal.

#

He'd walked 18,453 steps that day, about triple what he did on campus. His
heart rate had spiked several times, but not from exertion. Stress. He could
feel it in his muscles now. He should really do some biofeedback, try to calm
down, then run back his lifelogger and make some notes on how he'd reacted to
people through the day.

But the lifelogger was gone and he barely managed 22 seconds his first time on
the biofeedback. His next ten scores were much worse.

It was the hotel room. It had once been an office, and before that, it had been
half a hotel-room. There were still scuff-marks on the floor from where the
wheeled office chair had dug into the scratched lino. The false wall that
divided the room in half was thin as paper and Batman could hear every
snuffle from the other side. The door to Batman's room had been rudely hacked
in, and weak light shone through an irregular crack over the jamb.

The old New Yorker Hotel had seen better days, but it was what he could afford,
and it was central, and he could hear New York outside the window -- he'd
gotten the half of the hotel room with the window in it. The lights twinkled
just as he remembered them, and he still got a swimmy, vertiginous feeling when
he looked down from the great height.

The clerk had taken his photo and biometrics and had handed him a tracker-key
that his pan was monitoring with tangible suspicion. It radiated his identity
every few yards, and in the elevator. It even seemed to track which part of the
minuscule room he was in. What the hell did the hotel do with all this
information?

Oh, right -- it shipped it off to the Securitat, who shipped it to the Order,
where it was processed for suspicious anomalies. No wonder there was so much
work for them on campus. Multiply the New Yorker times a hundred thousand
hotels, two hundred thousand schools, a million cabs across the nation -- there
was no danger of the Order running out of work.

The hotel's network tried to keep him from establishing a secure connection
back to the Order's network, but the Order's countermeasures were better than
the half-assed ones at the hotel. It took a lot of tunneling and wrapping, but
in short measure he had a strong private line back to the Campus -- albeit a
slow line, what with all the jiggery-pokery he had to go through.

Gerta had left him with her file on zbigkrot and his activities on the network.
He had several known associates on Campus, people he ate with or played on
intramural teams with, or did a little extreme programming with. Gerta had
bulk-messaged them all with an oblique query about his personal life and had
forwarded the responses to Batman. There was a mountain of them, and he
started to plow through them.

He started by compiling stats on them -- length, vocabulary, number of
paragraphs -- and then started with the outliers. The shortest ones were polite
shrugs, apologies, don't have anything to say. The long ones -- whew! They
sorted into two categories: general whining, mostly from noobs who were still
getting accustomed to the way of the Order; and protracted complaints from old
hands who'd worked with zbigkrot long enough to decide that he was
incorrigible. Batman sorted these quickly, then took a glance at the median
responses and confirmed that they appeared to be largely unhelpful
generalizations of the sort that you might produce on a co-worker evaluation
form -- a proliferation of null adjectives like "satisfactory," "pleasant,"
"fine."

Somewhere in this haystack -- Batman did a quick word-count and came back
with 140,000 words, about two good novels' worth of reading -- was a needle, a
clue that would show him the way to unravel the Anomaly. It would take him a
couple days at least to sort through it all in depth. He ducked downstairs and
bought some groceries at an all-night grocery store in Penn Station and went
back to his room, ready to settle in and get the work done. He could use a few
days' holiday from New York, anyway.

#

> About time Zee Big Noob did a runner. He never had a moment's happiness here,
and I never figured out why he'd bother hanging around when he hated it all so
much.

> Ever meet the kind of guy who wanted to tell you just how much you shouldn't
be enjoying the things you enjoy? The kind of guy who could explain, in detail,
/exactly/ why your passions were stupid? That was him.

> "Brother Antony, why are you wasting your time collecting tin toys? They're
badly made, unlovely, and represent, at best, a history of slave labor,
starting with your cherished 'Made in Occupied Japan,' tanks. Christ, why not
collect rape-camp macrame while you're at it?" He had choice words for all of
us about our passions, but I was singled out because I liked to extreme program
in my room, which I'd spent a lot of time decorating. (See pic, below, and yes,
I built and sanded and mounted every one of those shelves by hand) (See
magnification shot for detail on the joinery. Couldn't even drive a nail when I
got here) (Not that there are any nails in there, it's all precision-fitted
tongue and groove) (holy moley, lasers totally rock)

> But he reserved his worst criticism for the Order itself. You know the
litany: we're a cult, we're brainwashed, we're dupes of the Securitat. He was
convinced that every instrument in the place was feeding up to the Securitat
itself. He'd mutter about this constantly, whenever we got a new stream to work
on -- "Is this your lifelog, Brother Antony? Mine? The number of flushes per
shitter in the west wing of campus?"

> And it was no good trying to reason with him. He just didn't acknowledge the
benefit of introspection. "It's no different from them," he'd say, jerking his
thumb up at the ceiling, as though there was a Securitat mic and camera hidden
there. "You're just flooding yourself with useless information, trying to find
the useful parts. Why not make some predictions about which part of your life
you need to pay attention to, rather than spying on every process? You're a spy
in your own body.

> So why did I work with him? I'll tell you: first, he was a shit-hot
programmer. I know his stats say he was way down in the 78th percentile, but he
could make every line of code that /I/ wrote smarter. We just don't have a way
of measuring that kind of effect (yes, someone should write one; I've been
noodling with a framework for it for months now).

> Second, there was something dreadfully fun about listening to him light into
/other/ people, /their/ ridiculous passions and interests. He could be
incredibly funny, and he was incisive if not insightful. It's shameful, but
there you have it. I am imperfect.

> Finally, when he wasn't being a dick, he was a good guy to have in your
corner. He was our rugby team's fullback, the baseball team's shortstop, the
tank on our MMOG raids. You could rely on him.

> So I'm going to miss him, weirdly. If he's gone for good. I wouldn't put it
past him to stroll back onto campus someday and say, "What, what? I just took a
little French Leave. Jesus, overreact much?"

Plenty of the notes ran in this direction, but this was the most articulate.
Batman read it through three times before adding it to the file of useful
stuff. It was a small pile. Still, Gerta kept forwarding him responses. The
late responders had some useful things to say:

> He mentioned a sister. Only once. A whole bunch of us were talking about how
our families were really supportive of our coming to the Order, and after it
had gone round the whole circle, he just kind of looked at the sky and said,
"My sister thought I was an idiot to go inside. I asked her what she thought I
should do and she said, 'If I was you, kid, I'd just disappear before someone
disappeared me.'" Naturally we all wanted to know what he meant by that. "I'm
not very good at bullshitting, and that's a vital skill in today's world. She
was better at it than me, when she worked at it, but she was the kind of person
who'd let her guard slip every now and then."

Batman noted that zbigkrot had used the past-tense to describe his sister.
He'd have known about her being disappeared then.

He stared at the walls of his hotel room. The room next door was now occupied
by at least four people and he couldn't even imagine how you'd get that many
people inside -- he didn't know how four people could all /stand/ in the room,
let alone lie down and sleep. But there were definitely four voices from next
door, talking in Chinese.

New York was outside the window and far below, and the sun had come up far
enough that everything was bright and reflective, the cars and the buildings
and the glints from sunglasses far below. He wasn't getting anywhere with the
docs, the sister, the data streams. And there was New York, just outside the
window.

He dug under the bed and excavated his boots, recoiling from them with soft,
dust-furred old socks and worse underneath the mattress.

#

The Securitat man pointed to Batman as he walked past Penn Station. Batman
stopped and pointed at himself in a who-me? gesture. The Securitat man pointed
again, then pointed to his alcove next to the entrance.

Batman's pan didn't like the Securitat man's incursions and tried to wipe
itself.

"Sir," he said. "My pan is going nuts. May I put down my arms so I can tell it
to let you in?"

The Securitat man acted as though he hadn't heard, just continued to wave his
hands slowly over Batman's body.

"Come with me," the Securitat man said, pointing to the door on the other side
of the alcove that led into a narrow corridor, into the bowels of Penn Station.
The door let out onto the concourse, thronged with people shoving past each
other, disgorged by train after train. Though none made eye contact with them
or each other, they parted magically before them, leaving them with a clear
path.

Batman's pan was not helping him. Every inch of his body itched as it nagged
at him about the depredations it was facing from the station and the Securitat
man. This put him seriously on edge and made his heart and breathing go crazy,
triggering another round of warnings from his pan, which wanted him to calm
down, but wouldn't help. This was a bad failure mode, one he'd never
experienced before. He'd have to file a bug report.

Some day.

The Securitat's outpost in Penn Station was as clean as a dentist's office, but
with mesh-reinforced windows and locks that made three distinct clicks and a
soft hiss when the door closed. The Securitat man impersonally shackled
Batman to a plastic chair that was bolted into the floor and then went off to
a check-in kiosk that he whispered into and prodded at. There was no one else
in evidence, but there were huge CCTV cameras, so big that they seemed to be
throwbacks to an earlier era, some paleolithic ancestor of the modern camera.
These cameras were so big because they were meant to be seen, meant to let you
know that you were being watched.

The Securitat man took him away again, stood him in an interview room where the
cameras were once again in voluble evidence.

"Explain everything," the Securitat man said. He rolled up his mask so that
Batman could see his face, young and hard. He'd been in diapers when Batman
went into the Order.

And so Batman began to explain, but he didn't want to explain everything.
Telling this man about zbigkrot tampering with Securitat data-streams would not
be good; telling him about the disappearance of Anja Krotoski would be even
worse. So -- he lied. He was already so stressed out that there was no way the
lies would register as extraordinary to the sensors that were doubtless trained
on him.

He told the Securitat man that he was in the world to find an Order member
who'd taken his leave, because the Order wanted to talk to him about coming
back. He told the man that he'd been trying to locate zbigkrot by following up
on his old contacts. He told the Securitat man that he expected to find
zbigkrot within a day or two and would be going back to the Order. He implied
that he was crucial to the Order and that he worked for the Securitat all the
time, that he and the Securitat man were on the same fundamental mission, on
the same team.

The Securitat man's face remained an impassive mask throughout. He touched an
earbead from time to time, cocking his head slightly to listen. Someone else
was listening to Batman's testimony and feeding him more material.

The Securitat man scooted his chair closer to Batman, leaned in close,
searching his face. "We don't have any record of this Krotoski person," he
said. "I advise you to go home and forget about him."

The words were said without any inflection at all, and that was scariest of all
-- Batman had no doubt about what this meant. There were no records because
Zbigniew Krotoski was erased.

Batman wondered what he was supposed to say to this armed child now. Did he
lay his finger alongside of his nose and wink? Apologize for wasting his time?
Everyone told him to listen before he spoke here. Should he just wait?

"Thank you for telling me so," he said. "I appreciate the advice." He hoped it
didn't sound sarcastic.

The Securitat man nodded. "You need to adjust the settings on your pan. It
reads like it's got something to hide. Here in the world, it has to accede to
lawful read attempts without hesitation. Will you configure it?"

Batman nodded vigorously. While he'd recounted his story, he'd imagined
spending a month in a cell while the Securitat looked into his deeds and
history. Now it seemed like he might be on the streets in a matter of minutes.

"Thank you for your cooperation." The man didn't say it. It was a recording,
played by hidden speakers, triggered by some unseen agency, and on hearing it,
the Securitat man stood and opened the door, waiting for the three distinct
clicks and the hiss before tugging at the handle.

They stood before the door to the guard's niche in front of Penn Station and
the man rolled up his mask again. This time he was smiling an easy smile and
the hardness had melted a little from around his eyes. "You want a tip, buddy?"

"Sure."

"Look, this is New York. We all just want to get along here. There's a lot of
bad guys out there. They got some kind of beef. They want to fuck with us. We
don't want to let them do that. You want to be safe here, you got to show New
York that you're not a bad guy. That you're not here to fuck with us. We're the
city's protectors, and we can spot someone who doesn't belong here the way your
body can spot a cold-germ. The way you're walking around here, looking around,
acting -- I could tell you didn't belong from a hundred yards. You want to
avoid trouble, you get less strange, fast. You get me?"

"I get you," he said. "Thank you, sir." Before the Securitat man could say any
more, Batman was on his way.

#

The man from Anja's building had a different sweater on, but the new one --
bulky wool the color of good chocolate -- was every bit as handsome as the one
he'd had on before. He was wearing some kind of citrusy cologne and his hair
fell around his ears in little waves that looked so natural they had to be
fake. Batman saw him across the Starbucks and had a crazy urge to duck away
and change into better clothes, just so he wouldn't look like such a fucking
hayseed next to this guy. /I'm a New Yorker,/ he thought, /or at least I was. I
belong here./

"Hey, Batman, fancy meeting you here!" He shook Batman's hand and gave him
a wry, you-and-me-in-it-together smile. "How's the vision quest coming?"

"Huh?"

"The Anomaly -- that's what you're chasing, aren't you? It's your little rite
of passage. My sister had one last year. Figured out that some guy who
travelled from Fort Worth to Portland, Oregon, every week was actually a
fictional construct invented by cargo smugglers who used his seat to plant a
series of mules running heroin and cash. She was so proud afterwards that I
couldn't get her to shut up about it. You had the holy fire the other night
when I saw you."

Batman felt himself blushing. "It's not really 'holy' -- all that religious
stuff, it's just a metaphor. We're not really spiritual."

"Oh, the distinction between the spiritual and the material is pretty arbitrary
anyway. Don't worry, I don't think you're a cultist or anything. No more than
any of us, anyway. So, how's it going?"

"I think it's over," he said. "Dead end. Maybe I'll get an easier Anomaly next
time."

"Sounds awful! I didn't think you were allowed to give up on Anomalies?"

Batman looked around to see if anyone was listening to them. "This one leads
to the Securitat," he said. "In a sense, you could say that I've solved it. I
think the guy I'm looking for ended up with his sister."

The man's expression froze, not moving one iota. "You must be disappointed," he
said, in neutral tones. "Oh well." He leaned over the condiment bar to get a
napkin and wrestled with the dispenser for a moment. It didn't cooperate, and
he ended up holding fifty napkins. He made a disgusted noise and said, "Can you
help me get these back into the dispenser?"

Batman pushed at the dispenser and let the man feed it his excess napkins,
arranging them neatly. While he did this, he contrived to hand Batman a card,
which Batman cupped in his palm and then ditched into his inside jacket
pocket under the pretense of reaching in to adjust his pan.

"Thanks," the man said. "Well, I guess you'll be going back to your campus
now?"

"In the morning," Batman said. "I figured I'd see some New York first. Play
tourist, catch a Broadway show."

The man laughed. "All right then -- you enjoy it." He did nothing significant
as he shook Batman's hand and left, holding his paper cup. He did nothing to
indicate that he'd just brought Batman into some kind of illegal conspiracy.

Batman read the note later, on a bench in Bryant Park, holding a paper bag of
roasted chestnuts and fastidiously piling the husks next to him as he peeled
them away. It was a neatly cut rectangle of card sliced from a health-food
cereal box. Lettered on the back of it in pencil were two short lines:

Wednesdays 8:30PM Half Moon Cafe 164 2nd Ave

The address was on the Lower East Side, a neighborhood that had been
scorchingly trendy the last time Batman had been there. More importantly: it
was Wednesday.

#

The Half Moon Cafe turned out to be one of those New York places that are so
incredibly hip they don't have a sign or any outward indication of their
existence. Number 164 was a frosted glass door between a dry-cleaner's and a
Pakistani grocery store, propped open with a squashed Mountain Dew can.
Batman opened the door, heart pounding, and slipped inside. A long, dark
corridor stretched away before him, with a single door at the end, open a
crack, dim light spilling out of it. He walked quickly down the corridor, sure
that there were cameras observing him.

The door at the end of the hallway had a sheet of paper on it, with HALF MOON
CAFE laser-printed in its center. Good food smells came from behind it, and the
clink of cutlery, and soft conversation. He nudged it open and found himself in
a dim, flickering room lit by candles and draped with gathered curtains that
turned the walls into the proscenia of a grand and ancient stage. There were
four or five small tables and a long one at the back of the room, crowded with
people, with wine in ice-buckets at either end.

A very pretty girl stood at the podium before him, dressed in a conservative
suit, but with her hair shaved into a half-inch brush of electric blue. She
lifted an eyebrow at him as though she was sharing a joke with him and said,
"Welcome to the Half Moon. Do you have a reservation?"

Batman had carefully shredded the bit of cardboard and dropped its tatters in
six different trash cans, feeling like a real spy as he did so (and realizing
at the same time that going to all these different cans was probably anomalous
enough in itself to draw suspicion).

"A friend told me he'd meet me here," he said.

"What was your friend's name?"

Batman stuck his chin in the top of his coat to tell his pan to stop warning
him that he was breathing too shallowly. "I don't know," he said. He craned his
neck to look behind her at the tables. He couldn't see the man, but it was so
dark in the restaurant --

"You made it, huh?" The man had yet another fantastic sweater on, this one with
a tight herringbone weave and ribbing down the sleeves. He caught Batman
sizing him up and grinned. "My weakness -- the world's wool farmers would
starve if it wasn't for me." He patted the greeter on the hand. "He's at our
table." She gave Batman a knowing smile and the tiniest hint of a wink.

"Nice of you to come," he said as they threaded their way slowly through the
crowded tables, past couples having murmured conversations over candlelight,
intense business dinners, an old couple eating in silence with evident relish.
"Especially as it's your last night in the city."

"What kind of restaurant is this?"

"Oh, it's not any kind of restaurant at all. Private kitchen. Ormund, he owns
the place and cooks like a wizard. He runs this little place off the books for
his friends to eat in. We come every Wednesday. That's his vegan night. You'd
be amazed with what that guy can do with some greens and a sweet potato. And
the cacao nib and avocado chili chocolate is something else."

The large table was crowded with men and women in their thirties, people who
had the look of belonging. They dressed well in fabrics that draped or clung
like someone had thought about it, with jewelry that combined old pieces of
brass with modern plastics and heavy clay beads that clicked like pool-balls.
The women were beautiful or at least handsome -- one woman with cheekbones like
snowplows and a jawline as long as a ski-slope was possibly the most striking
person he'd ever seen up close. The men were handsome or at least craggy, with
three-day beards or neat, full mustaches. They were talking in twos and threes,
passing around overflowing dishes of steaming greens and oranges and browns,
chatting and forking by turns.

"Everyone, I'd like you to meet my guest for the evening." The man gestured at
Batman. Batman had told the man his name, but he made it seem like he was
being gracious and letting Batman introduce himself.

"Batman," he said, giving a little wave. "Just in New York for one more
night," he said, still waving. He stopped waving. The closest people --
including the striking woman with the cheekbones -- waved back, smiling. The
furthest people stopped talking and tipped their forks at him or at least
cocked their heads.

"Sara," the cheekbones woman said, pronouncing the first "a" long, "Sah-rah,"
and making it sound unpretentious. The low-key buzzing from Batman's pan
warned him that he was still overwrought, breathing badly, heart thudding. Who
were these people?

"And I'm Randy," the man said. "Sorry, I should have said that sooner."

The food was passed down to his end. It was delicious, almost as good as the
food at the campus, which was saying something -- there was a dedicated cadre
of cooks there who made gastronomy their 20 percent projects, using elaborate
computational models to create dishes that were always different and always
delicious.

The big difference was the company. These people didn't have to retreat to
belong, they belonged right here. Sara told him about her job managing a
specialist antiquarian bookstore and there were a hundred stories about her
customers and their funny ways. Randy worked at an architectural design firm
and he had done some work at Sara's bookstore. Down the table there were actors
and waiters and an insurance person and someone who did something in city
government, and they all ate and talked and made him feel like he was a
different kind of man, the kind of man who could live on the outside.

The coals of the conversation banked over port and coffees as they drifted away
in twos and threes. Sara was the last to leave and she gave him a little hug
and a kiss on the cheek. "Safe travels, Batman." Her perfume was like an
orange on Christmas morning, something from his childhood. He hadn't thought of
his childhood in decades.

Randy and he looked at each other over the litter on the table. The server
brought a check over on a small silver tray and Randy took a quick look at it.
He drew a wad of twenties in a bulldog clip out of his inside coat pocket and
counted off a large stack, then handed the tray to the server, all before
Batman could even dig in his pocket.

"Please let me contribute," he managed, just as the server disappeared.

"Not necessary," Randy said, setting the clip down on the table. There was
still a rather thick wad of money there. Batman hadn't been much of a cash
user before he went into the Order and he'd seen hardly any spent since he came
back out into the world. It seemed rather antiquarian, with its elaborate
engraving. But the notes were crisp, as though freshly minted. The government
still pressed the notes, even if they were hardly used any longer. "I can
afford it."

"It was a very fine dinner. You have interesting friends."

"Sara is lovely," he said. "She and I -- well, we had a thing once. She's a
remarkable person. Of course, you're a remarkable person, too, Batman."

Batman's pan reminded him again that he was getting edgy. He shushed it.

"You're smart, we know that. 88th percentile. Looks like you could go higher,
judging from the work we've evaluated for you. I can't say as your performance
as a private eye is very good, though. If I hadn't intervened, you'd still be
standing outside Anja's apartment building harassing her neighbors."

His pan was ready to call for an ambulance. Batman looked down and saw his
hands clenched into fists. "You're Securitat," he said.

"Let me put it this way," the man said, leaning back. "I'm not one of Anja's
neighbors."

"You're Securitat," Batman said again. "I haven't done anything wrong --"

"You came here," Randy said. "You had every reason to believe that you were
taking part in something illegal. You lied to the Securitat man at Penn Station
today --"

Batman switched his pan's feedback mechanisms off altogether. Posy, at her
window, a penny stuck in the governor of her radiator, rose in his mind.

"Everyone was treating me like a criminal -- from the minute I stepped out of
the Order, you all treated me like a criminal. That made me act like one --
everyone has to act like a criminal here. That's the hypocrisy of the world,
that honest people end up acting like crooks because the world treats them like
crooks."

"Maybe we treat them like crooks because they act so crooked."

"You've got it all backwards," Batman said. "The causal arrow runs the other
direction. You treat us like criminals and the only way to get by is to act
criminal. If I'd told the Securitat man in Penn Station the truth --"

"You build a wall around the Order, don't you? To keep us out, because we're
barbarians? To keep you in, because you're too fragile? What does that
treatment do, Batman?"

Batman slapped his hand on the table and the crystal rang, but no one in the
restaurant noticed. They were all studiously ignoring them. "It's to keep /you/
out! All of you, who treated us --"

Randy stood up from the table. Bulky figures stepped out of the shadows behind
them. Behind their armor, the Securitat people could have been white or black,
old or young. Batman could only treat them as Securitat. He rose slowly from
his chair and put his arms out, as though surrendering. As soon as the
Securitat officers relaxed by a tiny hair -- treating him as someone who was
surrendering -- he dropped backwards over the chair behind him, knocking over a
little two-seat table and whacking his head on the floor so hard it rang like a
gong. He scrambled to his feet and charged pell-mell for the door, sweeping the
empty tables out of the way as he ran.

He caught a glimpse of the pretty waitress standing by her podium at the front
of the restaurant as he banged out the door, her eyes wide and her hands up as
though to ward off a blow. He caromed off the wall of the dark corridor and ran
for the glass door that led out to Second Avenue, where cars hissed by in the
night.

He made it onto the sidewalk, crashed into a burly man in a Mets cap, bounced
off him, and ran downtown, the people on the sidewalk leaping clear of him. He
made it two whole storefronts -- all the running around on the Campus handball
courts had given him a pretty good pace and wind -- before someone tackled him
from behind.

He scrambled and squirmed and turned around. It was the guy in the Mets hat.
His breath smelled of onions and he was panting, his lips pulled back. "Watch
where you're going --" he said, and then he was lifted free, jerked to his
feet.

The blood sang in Batman's ears and he had just enough time to register that
the big guy had been lifted by two blank, armored Securitat officers before he
flipped over onto his knees and used the posture like a runner's crouch to take
off again. He got maybe ten feet before he was clobbered by a bolt of lightning
that made every muscle in his body lock into rigid agony. He pitched forward
face-first, not feeling anything except the terrible electric fire from the
taser-bolt in his back. His pan died with a sizzle up and down every haptic
point in his suit, and between that and the electricity, he flung his arms and
legs out in an agonized X while his neck thrashed, grating his face over the
sidewalk. Something went horribly /crunch/ in his nose.

#

The room had the same kind of locks as the Securitat room in Penn Station. He'd
awakened in the corner of the room, his face taped up and aching. There was no
toilet, but there was a chair, bolted to the floor, and three prominent video
cameras.

They left him there for some time, alone with his thoughts and the deepening
throb from his face, his knees, the palms of his hands. His hands and knees had
been sanded raw and there was grit and glass and bits of pebble embedded under
the skin, which oozed blood.

His thoughts wanted to return to the predicament. They wanted to fill him with
despair for his situation. They wanted to make him panic and weep with the
anticipation of the cells, the confession, the life he'd had and the life he
would get.

He didn't let them. He had spent sixteen years mastering his thoughts and he
would master them now. He breathed deeply, noticing the places where his body
was tight and trembling, thinking each muscle into tranquility, even his aching
face, letting his jaw drop open.

Every time his thoughts went back to the predicament, he scrawled their anxious
message on a streamer of mental ribbon which he allowed to slip through his
mental fingers and sail away.

Sixteen years of doing this had made him an expert, and even so, it was not
easy. The worries rose and streamed away as fast as his mind's hand could write
them. But as always, he was finally able to master his mind, to find relaxation
and calm at the bottom of the thrashing, churning vat of despair.

When Randy came in, Batman heard each bolt click and the hiss of air as from
a great distance, and he surfaced from his calm, watching Randy cross the floor
bearing his own chair.

"Innocent people don't run, Batman."

"That's a rather self-serving hypothesis," Batman said. The cool ribbons of
worry slithered through his mind like satin, floating off into the ether around
them. "You appear to have made up your mind, though. I wonder at you -- you
don't seem like an idiot. How've you managed to convince yourself that this --"
he gestured around at the room "-- is a good idea? I mean, this is just --"

Randy waved him silent. "The interrogation in this room flows in one direction,
Batman. This is not a dialogue."

"Have you ever noticed that when you're uncomfortable with something, you talk
louder and lean forward a little? A lot of people have that tell."

"Do you work with Securitat data-streams, Batman?"

"I work with large amounts of data, including a lot of material from the
Securitat. It's rarely in cleartext, though. Mostly I'm doing sigint -- signals
intelligence. I analyze the timing, frequency and length of different kinds of
data to see if I can spot anomalies. That's with a lower-case 'a', by the way."
He was warming up to the subject now. His face hurt when he talked, but when he
thought about what to say, the hurt went away, as did the vision of the cell
where he would go next. "It's the kind of thing that works best when you don't
know what's in the payload of the data you're looking at. That would just
distract me. It's like a magician's trick with a rabbit or a glass of water.
You focus on the rabbit or on the water and what you expect of them, and are
flummoxed when the magician does something unexpected. If he used pebbles,
though, it might seem absolutely ordinary."

"Do you know what Zbigniew Krotoski was working on?"

"No, there's no way for me to know that. The streams are enciphered at the
router with his public key, and rescrambled after he's done with them. It's all
zero-knowledge."

"But you don't have zero knowledge, do you?"

Batman found himself grinning, which hurt a lot, and which caused a little
more blood to leak out of his nose and over his lips in a hot trickle. "Well,
signals intelligence being what it is, I was able to discover that it was a
Securitat stream, and that it wasn't the first one he'd worked on, nor the
first one he'd altered."

"He altered a stream?"

Batman lost his smile. "I hadn't told you that part yet, had I?"

"No." Randy leaned forward. "But you will now."

#

The blue silk ribbons slid through Batman's mental fingers as he sat in his
cell, which was barely lit and tiny and padded and utterly devoid of furniture.
High above him, a ring of glittering red LEDs cast no visible light. They would
be infrared lights, the better for the hidden cameras to see him. It was dark,
so he saw nothing, but for the infrared cameras, it might as well have been
broad daylight. The asymmetry was one of the things he inscribed on a blue
ribbon and floated away.

The cell wasn't perfectly soundproof. There was a gaseous hiss that
reverberated through it every forty six to fifty three breaths, which he
assumed was the regular opening and shutting of the heavy door that led to the
cell-block deep within the Securitat building. That would be a patrol, or a
regular report, or someone with a weak bladder.

There was a softer, regular grinding that he felt more than heard -- a subway
train, running very regular. That was the New York rumble, and it felt a little
like his pan's reassuring purring.

There was his breathing, deep and oceanic, and there was the sound in his
mind's ear, the sound of the streamers hissing away into the ether.

He'd gone out in the world and now he'd gone back into a cell. He supposed that
it was meant to sweat him, to make him mad, to make him make mistakes. But he
had been trained by sixteen years in the Order and this was not sweating him at
all.

"Come along then." The door opened with a cotton-soft sound from its balanced
hinges, letting light into the room and giving him the squints.

"I wondered about your friends," Batman said. "All those people at the
restaurant."

"Oh," Randy said. He was a black silhouette in the doorway. "Well, you know.
Honor among thieves. Rank hath its privileges."

"They were caught," he said.

"Everyone gets caught," Randy said.

"I suppose it's easy when everybody is guilty." He thought of Posy. "You just
pick a skillset, find someone with those skills, and then figure out what that
person is guilty of. Recruiting made simple."

"Not so simple as all that," Randy said. "You'd be amazed at the difficulties
we face."

"Zbigniew Krotoski was one of yours."

Randy's silhouette -- now resolving into features, clothes (another sweater,
this one with a high collar and squared-off shoulders) -- made a little
movement that Batman knew meant yes. Randy was all tells, no matter how suave
and collected he seemed. He must have been really up to something when they
caught him.

"Come along," Randy said again, and extended a hand to him. He allowed himself
to be lifted. The scabs at his knees made crackling noises and there was the
hot wet feeling of fresh blood on his calves.

"Do you withhold medical attention until I give you what you want? Is that it?"

Randy put an affectionate hand on his shoulder. "You seem to have it all
figured out, don't you?"

"Not all of it. I don't know why you haven't told me what it is you want yet.
That would have been simpler, I think."

"I guess you could say that we're just looking for the right way to ask you."

"The way to ask me a question that I can't say no to. Was it the sister? Is
that what you had on him?"

"He was useful because he was so eager to prove that he was smarter than
everyone else."

"You needed him to edit your own data-streams?"

Randy just looked at him calmly. Why would the Securitat need to change its own
streams? Why couldn't they just arrest whomever they wanted on whatever pretext
they wanted? Who'd be immune to --

Then he realized who'd be immune to the Securitat: the Securitat would be.

"You used him to nail other Securitat officers?"

Randy's blank look didn't change.

Batman realized that he would never leave this building. Even if his body
left, now he would be tied to it forever. He breathed. He tried for that
oceanic quality of breath, the susurration of the blue silk ribbons inscribed
with his worries. It wouldn't come.

"Come along now," Randy said, and pulled him down the corridor to the main
door. It hissed as it opened and behind it was an old Securitat man, legs
crossed painfully. Weak bladder, Batman knew.

#

"Here's the thing," Randy said. "The system isn't going to go away, no matter
what we do. The Securitat's here forever. We've treated everyone like a
criminal for too long now -- everyone's really a criminal now. If we dismantled
tomorrow, there'd be chaos, bombings, murder sprees. We're not going anywhere."

Randy's office was comfortable. He had some beautiful vintage circus posters --
the bearded lady, the sword swallower, the hoochi-coochie girl -- framed on the
wall, and a cracked leather sofa that made amiable exhalations of good tobacco
smell mixed with years of saddle soap when he settled into it. Randy reached
onto a tall mahogany bookcase and handed him down a first-aid kit. There was a
bottle of alcohol in it and a lot of gauze pads. Gingerly, Batman began to
clean out the wounds on his legs and hands, then started in on his face. The
blood ran down and dripped onto the slate tiled floor, almost invisible. Randy
handed him a waste-paper bin and it slowly filled with the bloody gauze.

"Looks painful," Randy said.

"Just skinned. I have a vicious headache, though."

"That's the taser hangover. It goes away. There's some codeine tablets in the
pill-case. Take it easy on them, they'll put you to sleep."

While Batman taped large pieces of gauze over the cleaned-out corrugations in
his skin, Randy tapped idly at a screen on his desk. It felt almost as though
he'd dropped in on someone's hot-desk back at the Order. Batman felt a sharp
knife of homesickness and wondered if Gerta was OK.

"Do you really have a sister?"

"I do. In Oregon, in the Order."

"Does she work for you?"

Randy snorted. "Of course not. I wouldn't do that to her. But the people who
run me, they know that they can get to me through her. So in a sense, we both
work for them."

"And I work for you?"

"That's the general idea. Zbigkrot spooked when you got onto him, so he's long
gone."

"Long gone as in --"

"This is one of those things where we don't say. Maybe he disappeared and got
away clean, took his sister with him. Maybe he disappeared into
our...operations. Not knowing is the kind of thing that keeps our other workers
on their game."

"And I'm one of your workers."

"Like I said, the system isn't going anywhere. You met the gang tonight. We've
all been caught at one time or another. Our little cozy club manages to make
the best of things. You saw us -- it's not a bad life at all. And we think that
all things considered, we make the world a better place. Someone would be doing
our job, might as well be us. At least we manage to weed out the real retarded
sadists." He sipped a little coffee from a thermos cup on his desk. "That's
where Zbigkrot came in."

"He helped you with 'retarded sadists'?"

"For the most part. Power corrupts, of course, but it attracts the corrupt,
too. There's a certain kind of person who grows up wanting to be a Securitat
officer."

"And me?"

"You?"

"I would do this too?"

"You catch on fast."

#

The outside wall of Campus was imposing. Tall, sheathed in seamless metal
painted uniform grey. Nothing grew for several yards around it, as though the
world was shrinking back from it.

/How did Zbigkrot get off campus?/

That's a question that should have occurred to him when he left the campus. He
was embarrassed that it took him this long to come up with it. But it was a
damned good question. Trying to force the gate -- what was it the old Brother
on the gate had said? Pressurized, blowouts, the walls rigged to come down in
an instant.

If zbigkrot had left, he'd walked out, the normal way, while someone at the
gate watched him go. And he'd left no record of it. Someone, working on Campus,
had altered the stream of data fountaining off the front gate to remove the
record of it. There was more than one forger there -- it hadn't just been
zbigkrot working for the Securitat.

He'd /belonged/ in the Order. He'd learned how to know himself, how to see
himself with the scalding, objective logic that he'd normally reserved for
everyone else. The Anomaly had seemed like such a bit of fun, like he was
leveling up to the next stage of his progress.

He called Gerta. They'd given him a new pan, one that had a shunt that
delivered a copy of all his data to the Securitat. Since he'd first booted it,
it had felt strange and invasive, every buzz and warning coming with the
haunted feeling, the /watched/ feeling.

"You, huh?"

"It's very good to hear your voice," he said. He meant it. He wondered if she
knew about the Securitat's campus snitches. He wondered if she was one. But it
was good to hear her voice. His pan let him know that whatever he was doing was
making him feel great. He didn't need his pan to tell him that, though.

"I worried when you didn't check in for a couple days."

"Well, about that."

"Yes?"

If he told her, she'd be in it too -- if she wasn't already. If he told her,
they'd figure out what they could get on her. He should just tell her nothing.
Just go on inside and twist the occasional data-stream. He could be better at
it than zbigkrot. No one would ever make an Anomaly out of him. Besides, so
what if they did? It would be a few hours, days, months or years more that he
could live on Campus.

And if it wasn't him, it would be someone else.

It would be someone else.

"I just wanted to say good bye, and thanks. I suspect I'm not going to see you
again."

Off in the distance now, the sound of the Securitat van's happy little song.
His pan let him know that he was breathing quickly and shallowly and he slowed
his breathing down until it let up on him.

"Batman?"

He hung up. The Securitat van was visible now, streaking toward the Campus
wall.

He closed his eyes and watched the blue satin ribbons tumble, like silky water
licking over a waterfall. He could get to the place that took him to anywhere.
That was all that mattered.

--

*Afterword:*

I wrote this story for the launch of tor.com in 2008, at the behest of Patrick
Nielsen Hayden, my friend and longstanding editor (Patrick also initially
published the story "Power Punctuation!" which appears later in this volume;
and, of course, he bought my first novel and my novels thereafter). Like
"Scroogled" (also in this volume), this story considers the problem with losing
sight of the ethical dimensions of hard and satisfying technical challenges,
like data-mining.

I got the inspiration for this story while driving from Martha's Vineyard to
New York with Patrick and his wife Teresa (Teresa copy-edited my next novel,
the young adult book "For the Win"). We were talking about people we knew from
science fiction fandom who had started out bright and promising but who had met
their match in the real world's difficulties and sunk into a ferocious
curmudgeonliness that would be comical if it wasn't so tragic. I wondered
aloud, "Where do you suppose those people would have gone in ages past?" and
Patrick immediately answered, "To a monastery." It was so obviously true and
weird that I knew I had to write this story.

Today, there's a monkish order that makes its living refurbishing toner
cartridges, just as other orders make honey or beer (mmm, Chimay!). It's not
such a stretch to imagine a future order that provides IT services to
totalitarian governments.

~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-


----------------------------------------
THE RIGHT BOOK
--------------

Now (-ish)

The thing that Arthur liked best about owning his own shop was that he could
stock whatever he pleased, and if you didn't like it, you could just shop
somewhere else. So there in the window were four ancient Cluedo sets rescued
from a car-boot sale in Sussex; a pair of trousers sewn from a salvaged WWII
bivouac tent; a small card advertising the availability of artisanal truffles
hand-made by an autistically gifted chocolatier in Islington; a brick of Pu'er
tea that had been made in Guyana by a Chinese family who'd emigrated a full
century previous; and, just as of now, six small, handsomely made books.

The books were a first for Arthur. He'd always loved reading the things, but
he'd worked at bookshops before opening his own little place in Bow, and he
knew the book-trade well enough to stay well away. They were bulky, these
books, and low-margin (Low margin? Two-for-three titles actually /lost/
money!), and honestly, practically no one read books anymore and what they did
read was mostly rubbish. Selling books depressed Arthur.

These little buggers were different, though. He reached into the window -- the
shop was so small he could reach it without leaving his stool behind the till
-- and plucked one out and handed it to the kid who'd just asked for it. She
was about 15, with awkward hair and skin and posture and so on, but the gleam
in her eye that said, "Where have you been all my life?" as he handed her the
book.

"They're all carrying them in school," she said. "Never thought I'd find one in
a shop, though. How much?"

Arthur compared the book to his cheat-sheet behind the counter. This one had a
cover made from old Hacks tins, resurfaced with a spectral spiderweb of rotting
Irish lace. The chapters within had a whopping aggregate score of 98 percent,
meaning that 98 percent of the writing community had rated them aces or above.
Even before he looked to the price column on his sheet, he knew he was going to
have to disappoint her.

"That one's seventy quid, love," he said. He armored himself for the inevitable
shock, disbelief and protestation, but she just hung her head, resigned.

"Figures," she said.

He ran his fingers down the spines until he found a cheaper one -- bound with
floppy felt screened with a remixed Victorian woodcut of a woman with tentacles
for arms. "This one's got mostly the same text, but I can let you have it for,
erm," he looked at the sheet again, thinking about the wholesale price, about
his margin. "Call it twenty-five pounds."

She shook her head again, gave him a wry smile. "Still too much. I should have
known. It's mostly the posh kids who've got 'em, the kind who turn up at school
with a tenner just for lunch money."

"You could just read it online, you know."

"Oh, I do," she said. "Been following it since it started." Her eyes flicked
down. "Wrote a little, too -- didn't make it into the top 100, though."

The Story So Far was part game, part competition, part creative writing
exercise, a massive shared universe drama with dozens of sub-plots, mysteries,
betrayals, crosses, and double-crosses. Everyone kept saying it was only a
matter of time until the big publishers started to cherry-pick the best writers
from the message-boards, but in the meantime, there were these little hand-made
editions, each one paying a small, honor-system royalty to the authors they
anthologized.

"Have you tried asking your teachers for help?" He knew as soon as he asked it
that it was the wrong sort of question. She rolled her eyes with adolescent
eloquence, then looked down again. "Only you might be able to get credit for it
-- independent study type of thing?"

She rolled her eyes again.

"Right," he said. "Right. Well, sorry I couldn't be more help." The little bell
over the door jingled merrily as she left.

#

"Back again?"

She had her school bag in her hands, zip opened, bag gaping. He was reminded of
all those terrible little signs that said "No more than two school kids in the
shop at any one time." Fancy that -- imagine if it said "No more than two women
in the shop" or "No more than two Asians in the shop" -- kids were the last
group you could treat like second class citizens without being called a bigot.

"Where do you get your copies of The Book?" she said. The Book, with the
capital letters -- the one book with a thousand covers, a million tables of
contents, each one not so much published as made, as curated.

"There's a man," he said. "Art student at UCL. He's got a little stall at the
weekend in the parking structure where Borough Market used to be."

"So you just buy them from some bloke? Does he make them?"

"I suppose so -- he gives me that impression, anyway." He liked her shrewd,
unembarrassed, direct questioning. Not a single scruple or a hint that she was
embarrassed to be interrogating him about the intimate details of his trade.

"Do you have, like, an exclusive arrangement with him?"

"No, no, nothing like that." Her hands were digging through the bag, looking
for something.

"Would you think about carrying these?"

She'd clearly bound them herself. Someone had taught her to really sew, her
Gran, maybe. You could see it in the neat stitching that ran the binding and
the spine, holding together the nylon and the denim, taken from a pair of
jeans, a backpack. The end-papers were yellowed page three girls from the Star,
strategically cropped just below the nipples. He'd been reading The Story So
Far ever since those first six copies had sold out in forty eight hours, and he
had an eye for the table of contents now, and he flipped to each volume's list,
giving them a long look.

"Who's Chloe Autumn?"

She didn't look down, looked at him with a look that was totally unapologetic.
"I am," she said. "It's one way to get my stuff into print, innit?" She
grinned. It was a very grown up grin.

"What do you think you want for them?"

"Those four I figure you can have cheaply -- say fifteen pounds each. You can
sell them for thirty, then. That's fair, I think."

It was more than fair. His UCL student wasn't carrying anything for less than
forty now, and was only offering him a 40 percent discount.

"What about returns?"

"What's a return?"

He reached under the counter and brought out the shooting stick he used as a
spare stool. "Have a seat," he said. "Let me explain some things. Want a cup of
tea? It's Pu'er. Chinese. Mostly."

#

+75 years (or so)

The kids in the shop were like kids everywhere. That weird, hyperaware thing
that came from the games they played all the time, even in their sleep; the
flawless skin and teeth (because no parent would dare choose otherwise at
conception), the loud, hooting calls that rippled through the little social
groups whenever a particularly bon mot vibrated its way through their tight
little networks, radiating at the speed of light.

Chloe watched them keenly from her perch behind the counter. After seventy-some
years perching on a stool, she'd finally done away with it. The exoskeleton
she'd been fitted for on her 90th birthday would lock very handily into a
seated position that took all the pressure off her bum and knees and hips. It
was all rather glorious.

Kids came into the store every day now, and in ever-increasing numbers. She
flicked her eyes sideways and menued over to her graph of young people in the
shop over time, warming herself on the upward trend.

It was Arthur's 110th birthday today, the mad old sod, and he was meant to be
coming into the shop for one of his rare tours of inspection. That had the
staff all a-twitter. He was something of a legend, the man who'd started the
distributorship that put small, carefully curated handsful of books into the
few retailers across the land who'd let young people in. No one could have
predicted how well books and Halal fried chicken went together.

"How long have you known him, then?" Marcel, her store manager, was only a few
years older than the kids who ghosted past her counter, playing some weird
round of their game, listening to cues only they could hear, heads all cocked
identically.

"Let me put it this way -- the first time we met, I was riding a brontosaurus."

He did her the favor of a smile, radiant and handsome as a movie marquee. They
were all like that these days. Thankfully she was old enough not to feel
self-conscious about it.

"Seriously, Chloe, when did you meet him?"

"I was fourteen -- no fifteen. That was before he was Sir Arthur Levitt, Savior
of English Literacy, you understand."

"And before you were Chloe Autumn, superstar author?" He was kidding her.
They'd stopped caring about what she wrote decades before he was born, but he
knew about her history and liked to tease. He had an easy way about him, and it
showed in the staff.

"Before then, yes."

"I still don't quite understand what it was he did -- what was so different
about his bookshop?"

"It wasn't a bookshop," she said. "You didn't know that part?" He shook his
head. "Well, that's the most important part. It wasn't a bookshop. Back then,
bookshops were practically the only place you could get a book. Oh, sure, the
newsagents might carry a few titles, but they were the same titles, all around
the country. Bookshops are fine if you already love books, but how do you fall
in love with books? Where does it start? There have to be books everywhere, in
places where you go before you know you're a reader. That was the secret."

"So how'd he do it?"

"I'll tell you how," Arthur said. He'd padded up to the counter on the oiled,
carefully balanced carapace of his exoskeleton, moving as spryly as a jaguar.
His eyes glittered with mad, birdy glee. "Hello, Chloe," he said.

"Happy birthday, love," she said, uncurling herself and levering herself up on
tiptoe -- the gyros whining -- to give him a kiss on the cheek. "Arthur, this
is Marcel."

They shook hands.

"I'll tell you how," Arthur said again, clearly enjoying the chance to unfurl
one of his old, well-oiled stories. "It was all about connecting kids up with
their local neighborhoods and the tastes there. Kids know what their friends
want to read. We had them curate their own anthologies of the best, most
suitable material from The Story So Far, put all that local knowledge to work.
The right book for the right person in the right place. You've got to give them
a religious experience before you can lure them into coming to church regular."

"Arthur thinks reading is a religion," Chloe said, noting Marcel's puzzled
expression.

"Obsolete, you mean?" Marcel said.

Arthur opened his mouth, shut it, prepared to have an argument. Chloe
short-circuited it by reaching under the counter and producing a carefully
wrapped package.

"Happy birthday, you old sod," she said, and handed it to Arthur.

He was clearly delighted. Slowly, he picked at the wrapping paper, making
something of a production of it, so much so that the kids started to drift over
to watch. He peeled back a corner, revealing the spine of the book, the neat
stitching, the nylon from an old, old backpack, the worn denim, the embroidered
title on the spine.

"You didn't," he said.

"I certainly did," she said, "now finish unwrapping it so that we can have some
cake."

#

150 years from now(ish)

The young man blinked his eyes at the coruscating lights and struggled into a
seated position, brushing off the powdery residue of his creation. "The Story
So Far?" he said.

"The Story So Far," a voice agreed with him from a very long way off and so
close in, it was practically up his nose.

"Better than Great Expectations again," he said, getting to his feet, digging
through the costumes on the racks around him. Knowledge slotted itself in his
head, asserting itself. Plots, other characters, what had come before, the
consensus about where things might go next. He didn't like the consensus. He
began to dress himself.

"Tell me about the reader," he said. The voice was back in an instant,
describing the child (four), the circumstances of his birth and life, his
interests. "So I'm a picture book?"

"No," the voice said. "He's reading in chapters now. It's the cognitive
fashion, here." At /here/, more knowledge asserted itself, the shape of the
comet on which they all resided, their hurtling trajectory, a seed-pod of
humanity on its way /elsewhere/.

"Right," he said, putting on gloves, picking out a moustache and a sword and a
laser-blaster. "Let's go sell some books."

--

*Afterword:*

This is another story that was inspired by Patrick Nielsen Hayden; specifically
by his very nice rant about how the collapse of small, local book distributors
that served grocers and pharmacies -- and the rise of national distributors who
serve big-box stores -- has destroyed the primary means by which new readers
enter the field. It's all well and good to have terrific giant bookstores (or
fabulous neighborhood stores, for that matter), but people don't go into those
stores unless they already love books. In the past, the love affair with books
often began outside of bookstores, in grocers and pharmacies, where you might
happen upon any number of quirky, hand-picked paperbacks stocked by the local
distributor. With the choice of books available outside of bookstores narrowed
to the handful of titles with national distribution, it's far less likely that
any given reader will discover "the right book" -- the one that turns her into
a book-junkie for the rest of her life.

Thus, this story. /The Bookseller/, Britain's oldest publishing trade magazine,
commissioned a story from me for its 150th anniversary issue -- three parts,
depicting the future of bookselling in 50, 100 and 150 years.

~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-


----------------------------------------
OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY
--------------------

Gretl's stall in the dead WalMart off the I-5 in Pico Rivera was not the
busiest spot in the place, but that was how she liked it. Time to think was
critical to her brand of functional sculpture, and reflection was the scarcest
commodity of all in 2027.

Which is why she was hoping that the venture capitalist would just leave her
alone. He wasn't a paying customer, he wasn't a fellow artist -- he wanted to
/buy/ her, and he was thirty years too late.

"You know, I pitched you guys in 1999. On Sand Hill Road. One of the founding
partners. Kleiner, I think. The guy ate a salad all through my slide-deck. When
I was done, he wiped his mouth, looked over my shoulder, and told me he didn't
think I'd scale. That was it. He didn't even pick up my business card. When I
looked back as I was going out the door, I saw him sweep it into the trash with
the wrapper from his sandwich."

The VC -- young, with the waxy, sweaty look of someone who ate a lot of GM
yogurt to try to patch his biochemistry -- shook his head. "That wasn't us.
We're a franchise -- based here in LA. I just opened up the Inglewood branch.
But I can see how that would have soured you on us. Did you ever get your VC?"

Gretl tossed her tablet with a crash on top of an overflowing barrel of primo
plastics and wiped her hands on the cunningly stitched dress quilted from back
pockets of vintage bootleg Levis, their frayed, misspelled red tags on proud
display. "Son, that was 1999. Within a year, VCs weren't writing term-sheets.
They were doing cram-downs on anything halfway decent in their portfolios,
forcing out the founders, trying to flip them before the market cratered. But
it wasn't that pitch that soured me on Sand Hill Road --"

"We're in Inglewood."

"Yes, you said." What the hell, it was Wednesday and she had all her week's
commissions done already. The VC was at least pretty, if you liked them young.
He had good teeth -- they all had good teeth now -- and a cute bump in the
bridge of his nose that spoke of a little bit of brawling before his B-school
days. "OK, here's the thing. I had running code, a half-million users. That was
big numbers then. We did moderation matching -- a heuristic that figured out
whether a message on a message board was flamebait, flagging up the worst
offenders to volunteers who blindly checked each other. The BBC was
hand-moderating a million message-board posts a /day/ back then. We could do
better. But no one thought we'd scale up -- our customers were little guys,
hotrodder boards, cooking boards. Most of them were getting everything for free
in exchange for serving as our 'reference customers,' which was how all those
biz-dev weasels did things back then.

"By 2007, we were 'Web 2.0.' I mean, we'd been Web 2.0 since Web 0.9, but now
it seemed like the world was ready for us. All we needed was some capital to
pay for the features our freeloading reference customers wanted. I met every
single shitweasel -- excuse me, junior analyst -- on Sand Hill and brain
dumped. They wrote great reports. We got nothing. No one was doing investments
then, either: it was all acquisition driven. Stupid Sarbanes-Oxley killed IPOs
and the VC went with it."

The stall across the way was half the size of hers. The old Shenzen couple that
ran it were real gnarly, covered in old burn scars from working in the plastic
tag factory where they'd met. Now they sold nostalgic hardware, old working
specialty appliances and devices from the WTO's heyday. They were highly
complementary to Gretl's own business, which is why they had such a friendly
relationship. The old woman, she called herself Chloe, was giving her a little
hand-gesture that meant, "Do you need help getting rid of this jerk?"

"It's OK," Gretl said to her, waving. "Want to get lunch in twenty minutes?"

The old lady rocked back and forth. "Not nutritionist food," she said. Gretl
nodded enthusiastically. Nutritionist food wasn't even food -- just nutrients
and flavoring. It was 80 percent of the stalls in the food-court, since the
capital costs of a food printer and feedstock were practically nil, and any
food hacker could differentiate himself by thinking up exotic new
texture/flavor/temperature combos.

"Twenty minutes, Mr VC."

"Udhay," he said. "Udhay Gonzales." He passed her a card, laser-etched on a
jumbo lima bean. She pocketed it.

"You'd have thought I'd learned my lesson by then, but no, sir. I am the
original glutton for punishment. After Bubble 2.0, I took my best coders, our
CFO, and a dozen of our users and did a little health-care startup, brokering
carbon-neutral medical travel plans to Fortune 500s. Today that sounds like old
hat, but back then, it was sexy. No one seriously believed that we could get
out from under the HMOs, but between Virgin's cheap bulk-ticket sales and the
stellar medical deals in Venezuela, Argentina and Cuba, it was the only
cost-effective way. And once the IWWWW signed up 80 percent of the US workforce
through World of Starcraft guilds, no employer could afford to skimp on health
insurance. The word would go out during that night's raids and by the morning,
you'd have picket lines in front of every branch office.

"We had all the right connections, but by then I was a 40-year old woman, and
that's as close as you can come to invisible in this society without having
brown skin or a janitor's uniform. I didn't even get a chance to get ignored in
the offices. We couldn't even get meetings -- not once they found my YASNS
profiles and saw what I looked like and the codgers in my social network.

"So that's when I threw in the towel. I bought a Dremel tool. Then a hot glue
gun. Then a CNC lathe. Then a mill. Then I got serious."

"Well, it seems to have worked out for you." The VC leaned over the display
cabinet. She saw his reflection in the clear top. His eyes were wide with
genuine admiration. OK, OK, she thought. OK, you get another five minutes,
Udhay Gonzales.

She opened the lid and made fortune-teller passes over her pieces with her
hands. "Pick them up, that's what they're for."

He went for the fish first. Its scales were individual slices from the skins of
old Nokia phones -- back when it was just Nokia, not Marvel Comics Mobile --
each articulated on its own little sprig of memory wire. The gills were scuffed
iPod backings, the logos just recognizable under the fog of scratches. The eyes
bore HP and Playstation logos, respectively, and the lips were made from
inner-tube strips that bore the smallest recognizable logomarks. As he lifted
it, it settled into his hand, arching back to find his thumb and palm, nestling
in there.

"It'll work like an old-time phone," she said. "It'll even do a little lookup
from old-style exchange numbers to different identity registers and try to get
you a voice-call with someone."

"Do people really do that?"

"Some do. Most just want it for the object-ness of it. It's got a lot of
emotion." The scuffs, that's what did it. They were like stories, those
scratches, each one a memento mori for some long-dead instant in some
stranger's life.

He picked up another piece. This one was purely sculptural, made from several
generations of iPhones, their screens carved into abstract shapes and then
painted with networked OLEDs that stitched them together into a single display.
The abstract shapes and colors combined with the device's aggressive incursions
on your PAN to give the sense of holding a vampire, something transgressive and
savage. Dangerous. "When was the last time you owned a device that felt that
dangerous?"

"Never!" The VC seemed to surprise himself with his vehemence. He fumbled the
device, caught it, set it down reverently.

Gretl laughed. "Oh, you can be rougher than that. My little critters love
adapting to hard circumstances." She tossed the vampire high in the sky, let it
come down on the floor, having righted itself in the air to take the drop on
its armored back. "You can't break it, it's made of garbage."

The VC fondled each of her pieces, making genuine appreciative noises. She
could tell the difference between the genuine article and the fakes.

"I remember all these things from when I was little," he said at last. "I
wanted them all so badly. Each one seemed impossibly wonderful and out of
reach."

"Yeah," she said. "That's what does it, all right. That feeling right there.
You watched these go from fetish item to six-for-a-buck in the blister packs at
the pharmacy check-out. This gives them back their dignity."

"Can I ask how many of these you sell?"

"Enough," she said. "As many as I can make. I mostly do commissions, but only
with people who come down in person. I won't sell online. Getting off email was
the best gift I ever gave myself."

"You are hard to reach," he said.

"Nope. I'm easy to reach -- you just have to haul ass here to Pico Rivera.
There's even parking, if you're that kind of pervert."

"I think I see why you aren't interested in capital," he said. "You can't scale
this up -- not with all the money in the world."

Gretl laughed. "You VCs -- scale, scale, scale! It's all you think of. You're
wrong, as it turns out. This business decomposes into four elements: materials
acquisition, design, fabrication and retail. They all scale like crazy.

"Take materials. After the WTO, the Chinese spent 25 years brute-forcing the
problem-space of all possible 3D plastic objects that an American might pay
money for. There is no shortage of that stuff -- most of it is sitting in
international waters somewhere on a container ship, waiting for someone to pay
the carbon taxes to land it somewhere. I can bring in all the junk electronics
and chassis and parts that I want, and I print the actuators, controllers,
wires and the rest of it here.

"Design? Design's easy. Roll the parts through the tumbler and let each one get
scanned up good. Then run the evolutionary algorithm to see how they can fit
together. I just watch it, tweaking it, culling the ugly mutants, cultivating
the pretty ones. I can do fifty original designs in a day, and by the time I'm
done with any random container, I'll have used up more than 80 percent of its
payload. The rest goes to some feedstockers to be eaten by bacteria.

"Manufacturing -- that's just monkey labor. Easy. Every kid takes shop class
nowadays, especially the girls."

"I made cars for my parents' anniversary," he said.

"Fuel-cell?"

He snorted. "No one wants to drive a truck anymore. Sub-micro solar. Fast
little things." He picked up the fish again. "And retail, that's just you,
here. So if you could scale up, why don't you?"

"Why should I? I'm making incredible money now. I could stand to double my
operation, but for that I'd need, what, 60 grand? What's the smallest angel
round you do at your franchise?"

"We're very nimble."

"How nimble?"

He mumbled something.

"Speak up!"

"Three hundred kay," he said, blushing. "But it doesn't have to be all to you.
We could roll your round up with five or six similar firms --"

"And increase my communications and bureaucracy overhead by 3,000 percent.
Yeah, that sounds /swell./ I net enough after expenses that I could double
every quarter if I wanted to. But I'm growing organically, cherry-picking my
best contractors and getting them on the payroll, expanding poco a poco. I'm
sixty years old, Mr Gonzales, and I don't need to grow like a tumor anymore."

He put the fish back down. It flopped.

"You say you're nimble. But from where I sit, you're not nimble enough. You're
starting off in the 300 grand range, and you're probably averaging a million in
your angel round, ten or twenty for Series A, seventy for Series B. I can turn
60 grand into 600 in six months. That's pretty good for me, as an individual.
But I can't turn your million into ten million -- not in six years. What does
your franchise have under management?"

"We're a gigafund," he said. He managed to make it sound like a boast.

She shook her head. "You poor, poor boy. How are you going to spend a billion
dollars in $300,000 increments? You'll be sitting on three quarters of that by
the time you cash out the fund."

"It's the smallest amount that a franchisee can take," he said.

"Well, sure. The parent company's got what, half a trillion under management?
Don't look so surprised. Yes, I keep up to date on the shenanigans you Mighty
Morphin' Power Brokers get up to in Silly Valley. No /wonder/ they're
franchising! But the secret is, big money is dumb money. I can spend a hundred
bucks so smart that I turn it into fifteen hundred. You look like a smart kid,
you could probably make a thousand. But you'll never do the same trick with
your billion in other people's money. Whoever sold you that franchise conned
you, sonny."

He looked glum.

"Oh, cheer up," she said. "You're a young man. Getting shafted by VCs builds
character. Look at me!"

He picked up the fish again. She knew what he was going to ask without having
to wait. She named the price. "But for you, a ten percent discount."

He shook his head and put it back. "I can't afford that," he said.

"What are you doing tonight?"

He cocked an eyebrow at her. "Don't worry, I'm not interested in your youthful
limbs. I just have a spot on my third shift. One of my girls is pregnant and
she's taking some maternity. You pull six hours starting at 11PM and you can
take that home."

"I'm not supposed to moonlight." He caressed the fish's scales. They rippled
under his finger.

"It's due diligence," she said.

He smiled. He was very pretty. And he'd built two cars -- not bad. He'd do OK.
Maybe he'd even work out and end up one of her regulars.

"Think about it. I close down at 6PM. You come by then, if you're interested,
and I'll give you the details for the fabrica."

She locked her cabinets and set out her "Gone to lunch" sign, then hopped over
the display case, vaulting it the way she'd learned to do in yogacrobatics
class in Silver Lake.

"Lunch time?"

Mrs. Huang called to one of her daughters to come out and staff the booth, then
came around on her cane.

"No nutritionist food," she said.

"Certainly not," Gretl said, sprinkling a wave at the VC as he moved off among
the stalls in the dead WalMart.

--

*Afterword:*

I have an odd and productive relationship with /Forbes/ magazine. I'm far from
a typical /Forbes/ reader, but they've commissioned several articles and this
short story from me, and the commissions are always challenging and just weird
enough to inspire. Here, the brief was to write about the future of
entrepreneurship. I'd been thinking a lot about how /little/ it costs to start
a business, and how predatory and awful many of the investors I'd met were, and
I came up with this -- a Socratic dialog between a startupist and a VC who
can't find anyone to take his money.

~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-


----------------------------------------
SCROOGLED
---------

"Give me six lines written by the most honorable of men, and I will find an
excuse in them to hang him." - Cardinal Richelieu

Greg landed at SFO at 8PM, but by the time he made it to the front of the
customs line it was after midnight. He had it good -- he'd been in first class,
first off the plane, brown as a nut and loose-limbed after a month on the beach
at Cabo, SCUBA diving three days a week, bumming around and flirting with
French college girls the rest of the time. When he'd left San Francisco a month
before, he'd been a stoop-shouldered, pot-bellied wreck -- now he was a bronze
god, drawing appreciative looks from the stews at the front of the plane.

In the four hours he spent in the customs line, he fell from god back to man.
His warm buzz wore off, the sweat ran down the crack of his ass, and his
shoulders and neck grew so tense that his upper back felt like a tennis racket.
The batteries on his iPod died after the third hour, leaving him with nothing
to do except eavesdrop on the middle-aged couple ahead of him.

"They've starting googling us at the border," she said. "I told you they'd do
it."

"I thought that didn't start until next month?" The man had brought a huge
sombrero on board, carefully stowing it in its own overhead locker, and now he
was stuck alternately wearing it and holding it.

Googling at the border. Christ. Greg vested out from Google six months before,
cashing in his options and "taking some me time," which turned out to be harder
than he expected. Five months later, what he'd mostly done is fix his friends'
PCs and websites, and watch daytime TV, and gain ten pounds, which he blamed on
being at home, instead of in the Googleplex, with its excellent 24-hour gym.

The writing had been on the wall. Google had a whole pod of lawyers in charge
of dealing with the world's governments, and scumbag lobbyists on the Hill to
try to keep the law from turning them into the world's best snitch. It was a
losing battle. The US Government had spent $15 /billion/ on a program to
fingerprint and photograph visitors at the border, and hadn't caught /a single/
terrorist. Clearly, the public sector was not equipped to Do Search Right.

The DHS officers had bags under their eyes as they squinted at their screens,
prodding mistrustfully at their keyboards with sausage fingers. No wonder it
was taking four hours to get out of the goddamned airport.

"Evening," he said, as he handed the man his sweaty passport. The man grunted
and swiped it, then stared at his screen, clicking. A lot. He had a little bit
of dried food in the corner of his mouth and his tongue crept out and licked at
it as he concentrated.

"Want to tell me about June, 1998?"

Greg turned his head this way and that. "I'm sorry?"

"You posted a message to alt.burningman on June 17, 1998 about your plan to
attend Burning Man. You posted, 'Would taking shrooms be a really bad idea?'"

#

It was 3AM before they let him out of the "secondary screening" room. The
interrogator was an older man, so skinny he looked like he'd been carved out of
wood. His questions went a lot further than the Burning Man shrooms. They were
just the start of Greg's problems.

"I'd like to know more about your hobbies. Are you interested in model
rocketry?"

"What?"

"Model rocketry."

"No," Greg said. "No, I'm not." Thinking of all the explosives that model
rocketry people surrounded themselves with.

The man made a note, clicked some more. "You see, I ask because I see a heavy
spike of ads for model rocketry supplies showing up alongside your search
results and Google mail."

Greg felt his guts spasm. "You're looking at my searches and email?" He hadn't
touched a keyboard in a month, but he knew that what you put into the searchbar
was more intimate than what you told your father-confessor. He'd seen enough
queries to know that.

"Calm down, please. No, I'm not looking at your searches." The man made a
bitter lemon face and went on in a squeaky voice. "That would be
/unconstitutional/. You weren't listening to me. We see the /ads/ that show up
when you read your mail and do your searching. I have a brochure explaining it,
I'll give it to you when we're through here."

"But the ads don't mean /anything/ -- I get ads for Ann Coulter ringtones
whenever I get email from my friend who lives in Coulter, Iowa!"

The man nodded. "I understand, sir. And that's just why I'm here talking to
you, instead of just looking at this screen. Why do you suppose model rocket
ads show up so frequently for you?"

He thought for a moment. "OK, just do this. Go to Google and search for 'coffee
fanciers', all right?" He'd been very active in the group, helping them build
out the site for their coffee-of-the-month subscription service. The blend they
were going to launch with was called "Jet Fuel." "Jet Fuel" and "Launch" --
that'd probably make Google barf up model rocket ads. Not that he would know --
he blocked all the ads in his browser.

#

They were in the home stretch when the carved man found the Hallowe'en photos.
They were buried three screens deep in the search results for "Greg Lupinski,"
and Greg hadn't noticed them.

"It was a Gulf War themed party," he said. "In the Castro."

"And you're dressed as --?"

"A suicide bomber." Just saying the words in an airport made him nervous, as
though uttering them would cause the handcuffs to come out.

"Come with me, Mr Lupinski."

#

The search lasted a long time. They swabbed him in places he didn't know he
had. He asked about a lawyer. They told him that he could call all the lawyers
he wanted once he was out of the Customs sterile area.

"Good night, Mr Lupinski." This was a new interrogator, a man who'd wanted to
know about the reason that he'd sought both night diving and deep diving
specialist certification from the PADI instructor in Cabo. The guy implied that
Greg had been training to be an al-Qaeda frogman, and didn't seem to believe
that Greg had just wanted to do all the certifications he could, pursuing
diving the way he pursued everything: thoroughly.

But now the man with the frogman fantasy was bidding him a good night and
releasing him from the secondary screening area. His suitcases stood alone by
the baggage carousel. When he picked them up, he saw that they had been opened
and then inexpertly closed. Some of his clothes stuck out from around the
edges.

At home, he saw that all the fake "pre-Colombian" statues had been broken, and
that his white cotton Mexican shirt -- folded and fresh from his laundry-lady
-- had a boot-print in the middle of it. His clothes no longer smelled of
Mexico. Now they smelled of airports and machine oil.

The mailman had dropped an entire milk-crate of mail off at his place that day,
but he couldn't even begin to confront it. All he could think of, as the sun
rose over the Mission, turning the Victorian houses they called "painted
ladies" vivid colors, was what it meant to be googled.

He wasn't going to sleep. No /way/. He needed to talk about this. And there was
only one person who he could talk to, and luckily, she was usually awake around
now.

#

Maya had started at Google two years after him, but had gotten a much bigger
grant of stock than he had. She knew exactly what she was going to do with it,
too, once she vested: take her dogs and her girlfriend and head to Florence,
for good. Learn Italian, take in the museums, sit in the cafes. It was she
who'd convinced him to go to Mexico: anywhere, she said, anywhere that he could
reboot his existence.

Maya had two giant chocolate Labs and a very, very patient girlfriend who'd put
up with anything except being dragged around Dolores Park at 6AM by 350 pounds
of drooling brown canine.

She went for her Mace as he jogged towards her, then did a double-take and
threw her arms open, dropping the leashes and stamping on them with one
sneaker, a practiced gesture. "Where's the rest of you? Dude, you look /hawt/!"

He took the hug, suddenly self-conscious of the way he smelled after a night of
invasive googling. "Maya," he said. "Maya, what do you know about the DHS?"

She stiffened and the dogs whined. She looked around, then nodded up at the
tennis courts. "Top of the light standard there, don't look, there. That's one
of our muni WiFi access points. Wide-angle webcam. Face away from it when you
talk. Lip-readers."

He parsed this out slowly. Google's free municipal WiFi program was a hit in
every city where it played, and in the grand scheme of things, it hadn't cost
much to put WiFi access points up on light standards and other power-ready
poles around town. Especially not when measured against the ability to serve
ads to people based on where they were sitting. He hadn't paid much attention
when they'd made the webcams on all those access points public -- there'd been
a day's worth of blogstorm while people looked out over their childhood streets
or patrolled prostitution strolls, fingering johns, but it had blown over.

Now he felt -- /watched/.

Feeling silly, he kept his lips together and mumbled, "You're joking."

"Come with me," she said, facing squarely away from the pole.

#

The dogs weren't happy about having their walks cut short, and they let it be
known in the kitchen as Maya fixed coffee for them -- barking, banging into the
table and rocking it. Maya's girlfriend Laurie called out from the bedroom and
Maya went back to talk to her, then emerged, looking flustered.

"It started with China," she said. "Once we moved our servers onto the
mainland, they went under Chinese jurisdiction. They could google everyone
going through our servers." Greg knew what that meant: if you visited a page
with Google ads on it, if you used Google maps, if you used Google mail -- even
if you /sent/ mail to a gmail account -- Google was collecting your info,
forever.

"They were using us to build profiles of people. Not arresting them, you
understand. But when they had someone they wanted to arrest, they'd come to us
for a profile and find a reason to bust them. There's hardly anything you can
do on the net that isn't illegal in China."

Greg shook his head. "Why did they put the servers in China?"

"The government said they'd block them if they didn't. And Yahoo was there."
They both made a face. Somewhere along the way, Google had become obsessed with
Yahoo, more worried about what the competition was doing than how they were
performing. "So we did it. But a lot of us didn't like the idea."

She sipped her coffee and lowered her voice. One of the dogs whined. "I made it
my 20 percent project." Googlers were supposed to devote 20 percent of their
time to blue-sky projects. "Me and my pod. We call it the googlecleaner. It
goes deep into the database and statistically normalizes you. Your searches,
your gmail histograms, your browsing patterns. All of it."

"The search ads?"

"Ah," she grimaced. "Yes, the DHS. So we brokered a compromise with the DHS.
They'd stop asking to go fishing in our search records and we'd let them see
what ads got displayed for you."

Greg felt sick. "Why? Don't tell me Yahoo was doing it already --"

"No, no. Well, yes. Sure. Yahoo was already doing it. But that wasn't it. You
know, Republicans /hate/ Google. We are overwhelmingly registered Democrat. So
we're doing what we can to make peace with them before they clobber us. This
isn't PII --" Personally Identifying Information, the toxic smog of the
information age "-- it's just /metadata/. So it's only slightly evil."

"If it's all so innocuous, why all this cloak-and-dagger stuff?"

She sighed and hugged the dog that was butting her with his huge, anvil-shaped
head. "The spooks are like pubic lice. They get everywhere. Once we let them
in, everything suddenly got a lot more -- secret. Some of our meetings have to
have spooks present, it's like being in some Soviet ministry, with a political
officer always there, watching everything. And the security clearance. Now
we're divided into these two camps: the cleared and the suspect. We all know
who isn't cleared, but no one knows why. I'm cleared. Lucky me -- being a homo
no longer disqualifies you for access to seekrit crap. No cleared person wants
to even eat lunch with an un-clearable. And every now and again, one of your
teammates will get pulled off your project 'for security reasons', whatever
that means."

Greg felt very tired. "So now I'm feeling lucky I got out of the airport alive.
I suppose I might have ended up in Gitmo if it had gone badly, huh?"

She was staring at him intently, her eyes flicking from side to side. He
waited, but she didn't say anything.

"What?"

"What I'm about to tell you, you can't ever repeat it, OK?"

"Um, OK? You're not going to tell me you're a deep-cover Al-Quaeda suicide
bomber?"

"Nothing so simple. Here's the thing: the airport DHS scrutiny is a gating
function. It lets the spooks narrow down their search criteria. Once you get
pulled aside for secondary at the border, you become a 'person of interest,'
and they never, ever let up. They'll check the webcams for your face and gait.
Read your mail. Log your searches."

"I thought you said the courts wouldn't let them --"

"The courts won't let them /indiscriminately/ google you. But once you get into
the system, it becomes a /selective/ search. All legal. And once they start
googling you, they /always/ find something."

"You mean to say they've got a boiler-room of midwestern housewives reading the
email of everyone who ever got a second look at the border? Sounds like the
world's shittiest job."

"If only. No, this is all untouched by human hands. All your data is fed into a
big hopper that checks for 'suspicious patterns' and gradually builds the case
against you, using deviation from statistical norms to prove that you're guilty
of /something/. It's just a variation of the way we spot search-spammers" --
the "optimizers" who tried to get their Viagra scams and Ponzi schemes to come
to the top of the search results "-- but instead of lowering your search rank,
we increase your probability of being sent to Syria. And of course, they google
all of /us/, everyone who works on anything 'sensitive.'"

"Naturally," Greg said. He felt like he was going to throw up. He felt like
never using a search engine again. "How the hell did this /happen/? It's such a
/good/ place. 'Don't be evil,' right?" That was the corporate motto, and for
Greg, it had been a huge part of his reason for taking his fresh-minted
computer science PhD from Stanford directly to Google.

Maya's laugh was bitter and cynical. "Don't be evil? Come on, Greg. Don't you
remember what it was like when we started censoring the Chinese search results,
and we all asked how that could be anything but evil? The company line was
hilarious: 'We're not doing evil -- we're giving them access to a better search
tool! If we showed them search results they couldn't get to, that would just
frustrate them. It would be a /bad user experience/'. If we hadn't lost our
don't-be-evil cherry by then, we surely did the day we took that one."

"Now what?" Greg pushed a dog away from him and Maya looked hurt.

"Now you're a person of interest, Greg. Googlestalked. Now, you live your life
with someone watching over your shoulder, all the time. You know the mission
statement, right? 'Organize all human knowledge.' That's /everything/. Give it
five years, we'll know how many turds were in the bowl before you flushed.
Combine that with automated suspicion of anyone who matches a statistical
picture of a bad guy and you're --"

"I'm scroogled."

"Totally."

"Thanks, Maya," he said. "Thanks anyway."

"Sit down," she said. The dog that had been bumping at his legs was at it
again. Maya took both dogs down the hall to the bedroom and he heard her
muffled argument with her girlfriend. She came back without the dogs.

"I can fix this," she said in a whisper so low it was practically a hiss. "I
can googleclean you."

"But you're under constant scrutiny --"

"By DHS agents. Once they fired all non-native-born Americans from the DHS, it
got a lot fatter and stupider. I can googleclean you, Greg."

"I don't want you to get into trouble."

She shook her head. "I'm already doomed. I built the googlecleaner. Every day
since then has been borrowed time -- now it's just a matter of waiting for
someone to point out my expertise and history to the DHS and, oh, I don't know.
Whatever it is they do to people like me in the War on Abstract Nouns."

Greg remembered the questioning at the airport. The search. His shirt, the
bootprint in the middle of it.

"Do it," he said.

#

The ads were weird. He hadn't really paid attention to them in years. The
blocker got rid of most of them, but Google changed its code often enough that
their little text ads showed up on a lot of his pages. They stayed subliminal
mostly -- only clunkers like that Ann Coulter ringtone ad made it past his eyes
into his brain.

Now the clunkers were everywhere: Intelligent Design Facts, Online Seminary
Degree, Terror Free Tomorrow, Porn Blocker Software, Homosexuality and Satan.
He clicked through a couple of these and found himself in some kind of
alternate universe Internet, full of weird opinions about the evils of being
gay, the certainty of the young Earth, the need for eternal national vigilance.

Then he started to notice something weird about the search results themselves.
After unpacking his suitcase and opening his mail, he spent two weeks sitting
at home on his ass, surfing. His pre-Mexico belly was reemerging, so he decided
to do something about it. No burritos for lunch today -- he'd go to that
holistic place Maya had told him about. Vegan low-fat cuisine couldn't possibly
be as gross as it sounded.

"Did you mean 'Hungarian Restaurants'?"

He snorted. No, he'd meant "holistic restaurants," you dumbass search-engine.
It nagged at him. He pulled up his search history and went back through the
results, printing out the pages. Then he logged out of his Google account and
went back through the same searches, comparing the results to the logged-in
pages. The differences were striking. A search for "democratic primary" pointed
to anti-Hillary rants on angry blogs when he was logged in, and to information
on volunteering for the DNC when he was logged out. Searching for "abortion
clinic" while logged out listed the nearest Planned Parenthood office;
searching while logged in gave him information about Campaign Life,
ProLife.com, and the ProLife alliance. Good thing he wasn't pregnant.

This was Maya's googlecleaner at work. It was like the stories of people who
asked their TiVos to record an episode of "Queer Eye" and then got inundated
with suggestions for other "gay shows" -- "My TiVo thinks I'm gay," was the
title of one article he remembered. Google had been experimenting with
"personalized" search results before he left the country -- here it was, in all
its glory.

Google thought he was a conservative Christian Republican who supported the War
on Terror and many other abstract nouns.

He logged out of Google -- that was simple. Five minutes later, he logged in
again. His entire address book was in there. He logged out again. Logged back
in. His calendar -- when was his parents' anniversary again? Logged out. Logged
back in. Needed his bookmarked locations in Maps. Logged out.

He stopped trying. Google was where his friendships lived -- all those people
he stayed connected to on Orkut. It was where his relationships lived: all that
archived email, all those addresses in his address-book. It was his family
photos, his bookmarks. Hell, his search history -- his real search history --
was like an outboard brain, remembering which parts of the unplumbable Internet
he cared about, so that he didn't have to remember it the hard way, with the
meat in his skull.

Google had a copy of him -- all the parts of him that navigated the world and
the people in it. Google owned that copy, and without it, he couldn't be
himself anymore. He'd just have to stay logged in.

#

Greg mashed the keys on the laptop next to his bed, bringing the screen to
life. He squinted at the toolbar clock: 4:13AM! Christ, who was pounding on his
door at this hour?

He shouted "Coming!" in a muzzy voice and pulled on a robe and slippers. He
shuffled down the hallway, turning on lights as he went, squinting. At the
door, he squinted through the peephole, peering at -- Maya.

He undid the chains and the deadbolt and yanked the door open and Maya rushed
in past him, followed by the dogs, followed by her girlfriend, Laurie, whom
he'd last seen at a Christmas party at Google, in a fabulous cocktail dress and
an elaborate up-do. Now she was wearing a freebie Google Summer of Code
sweatshirt, jeans, and a frown that started between her eyebrows and
intensified all the way down her face.

Maya was sheened with sweat, her hair sticking to her forehead. She scrubbed at
her eyes, which were red and lined.

"Pack a bag," she said, in a hoarse croak.

"What?"

"Whatever you can't live without. A couple changes of clothes. Anything you're
sentimental about -- shoebox of pictures, your grandfather's razor, whatever.
But keep it small, something you can carry. We're traveling light."

"Maya, what are you --"

She took him by the shoulders. "Do. It," she said. "Don't ask questions right
now. There's no time."

"Where do you want to --"

"Mexico, probably. Don't know yet. /Pack/, dammit." She pushed past him into
his bedroom and started yanking open drawers.

"Maya," he said, sharply, "I'm not going anywhere until you tell me what's
going on."

She glared at him and pushed her hair away from her face. "The googlecleaner
lives. I shut it down, walked away from it, after I did you. It was too
dangerous to use anymore. But I still get buginizer notifications when new bugs
get filed against it, I'm still in B as the project's owner. Someone filed
eight bugs against it this week. Someone's used it six times to smear six very
specific accounts."

"Who's using it?"

"Well, I'll give you a hint. Let me tell you who's been cleaned this week --"
She listed six candidates, four Republican and two Democrat, who were all in
the running for the primaries.

"Googlers are blackwashing political candidates?"

"Not Googlers. This is all coming from offsite. The IP block is registered in
DC. And the IPs are all also used by Gmail users. And those Gmail users --"

"You spied on gmail accounts?"

"I'm leaving in two minutes, with or without you. You can interrupt me to ask
me questions, or you can listen." She gave him another look. Laurie stood in
the door of the bedroom, holding the dogs by the collars and looking down at
the floor.

"Good. OK. Yes. I did spy on their email. Of course I did. Everyone does it,
now and again, and for a lot worse reasons than this.

"It's our lobbying firm. The ones who invented the Swift Boat Veterans for
Truth. Remember them? It was a stink when we hired them, but Google couldn't
afford to be 'that company full of registered Democrats' forever. We needed
friends in Congress. These guys could do it for us."

"But they're ruining politicians' careers!"

"Yeah. They certainly are. And who benefits when they do that?"

Laurie spoke, at last. "Other politicians."

He felt his pulse beating in his temples. "We should tell someone."

"Yeah," Maya said. "How? They know everything about us. They can see every
search. Every email. Every time we've been caught on the webcams. Who is in our
social network -- you know that if you've got more than fifteen Orkut buddies,
it's statistically certain that you're no more than three steps to someone
who's contributed money to a 'terrorist' cause? Remember the airport? Imagine a
lot more of that."

"Maya," he said, carefully. "I think you're over-reacting. You don't need to go
to Mexico. You can just quit. We can do a startup together or something. Or you
can move to the country and raise dogs. Whatever. This is crazy --"

"They came to see me today," she said. "At work. Two of the political officers
-- the minders who monitor our sensitive projects. And they asked me a lot of
very heavy questions."

"About the googlecleaner?"

"About my friends and family. About my search history. About my political
beliefs."

"Jesus."

"They were sending me a message. They were letting me know that they were onto
me. They're watching every click and every search. It's time to go -- time to
get out of range."

"There's a Google office in Mexico, you know."

"Are you coming, Greg? We're going now."

"Laurie, what do you think of this?"

Laurie thumped the dogs between the shoulders. "Maya showed me what Google
knows about me. It's like there's a little me in there, a copy of me. Like I'm
pinned down under a jar with a ball of ether. My parents left East Germany in
'65 -- they used to tell me about the Stasi. They'd put everything about you in
your file -- even unpatriotic jokes. Lately I've been feeling...watched. All
the time. Like I can't live without leaving a trail. Like I'm throwing off a
smog of data and it can't be gotten rid of."

"We're going now, Greg. Now. Are you coming?"

Greg looked at the dogs. "I've got some pesos left over," he said. "You take
them. Be careful, OK?"

She looked like she was going to slug him. Then she softened and gave him a
ferocious hug. "Be careful yourself," she whispered in his ear.

#

They came for him a week later. At home, in the middle of the night, just as
he'd imagined it. Their knock was nothing like Maya's tentative, nervous thump.
They went bang-bang-bang, confident, knowing that they had every right to be
there and not caring who else came after them.

Two men. One stayed by the door and didn't say anything. The other was a
smiler, short and rumpled, in a sports coat with a small stain on one lapel and
a cloisonné American flag on the other. "Computer Fraud and Abuse Act," he
said, by way of introduction. "'Exceeding authorized access, and by means of
such conduct having obtained information.' Ten years for a first offense, ever
since the PATRIOT Act extended it. I have it on the best of authority that what
you and your friend did to your Google records qualifies. And oh, what will
come out in the trial. All the stuff you whitewashed out of your profile."

Greg had been playing this scene out in his head for a week. He'd had all kinds
of brave things to say, planned out in advance. He'd even written some down, to
see how they looked. It had given him something to do while the knots in his
stomach tightened, while he waited to hear from Maya.

"I'd like to call a lawyer," is all he managed. It came out in a whisper.

"You can do that," the man said. "But hear me out first."

Greg found his voice. "I'd like to see your badge."

The man's basset-hound face lit up as he hissed a laugh. "Oh, Greg, buddy. I'm
not a cop. I work for --" He named the DC firm in Google's employ. The
inventors of swiftboating. "You're a Googler. You're part of the family. We
couldn't send the police after you without talking with you first. There's an
offer I'd like to make."

Greg made coffee. It gave him something to do with his hands while he tried to
find that bravery he'd been honing all week. "I'll go to the press," he said.
"I've written this all up. I'll go straight to them."

The guy nodded as if thinking it over. "Well, sure. You could walk into the
Chronicle's office in the morning and spill everything you need. They'd try to
find a confirming source. They won't find it. Maybe you'll try to show them
what your profile looks like today? Well, tell you what, it looks just like it
looked the day you landed at SFO. Greg, buddy, why don't you hear me out before
you start trying to figure out how to fight me? I'm in the win-win business.
I'm in the business of figuring out how to get all parties what they need. I'm
very good at it. You don't even want to know what I'm billing Google for this
little tete-a-tete. By the way, those are excellent beans, but you want to give
them a little rinse first, takes some of the bitterness out and brings up the
oils. Here, pass me a colander?"

Greg watched in numb bemusement as the man took off his jacket and hung it over
a kitchen chair, then undid his cuffs and rolled them up, slipping a cheap
digital watch into his pocket. Then he poured the beans back out of the grinder
and into Greg's colander and did things at the sink.

He was a little pudgy, and very pale. He needed a haircut -- had unruly curls
at his neck. It made Greg relax, somehow. This guy had the social gracelessness
of a nerd, felt like a real Googler, obsessed with the minutiae. He knew his
way around a coffee-grinder, too.

"We're drafting a team for Building 49 --"

"There is no building 49," Greg said, automatically.

"Yeah," the guy said, with a private little smile. "There's no Building 49. And
we're putting together a team, with its own buginizer, to own googlecleaner.
Maya's code wasn't very efficient. Every time someone runs it, it clobbers the
whole farm. And it's got plenty of bugs. We've asked around and there's
consensus on this. You'd be the right guy, and it wouldn't matter what you knew
if you were back inside --"

"No, I wouldn't," Greg said. "You're on crack."

"Hear me out. There's money involved. Good work, too. Smart colleagues. A
direction for your life. A chance to participate in the political life of your
country --"

Greg gave a bitter laugh. "Unbelievable," he said. "If you think I'm going to
help you smear political candidates in exchange for favors, you're even crazier
than I thought."

"Greg," he said, "Greg, you're right. That was dumb. No one is going to do that
anymore. We're just going to -- clean things up a little. For some select
people. You know what I mean, right? Every Google profile is a little scary
under close inspection. Close inspection is the order of the day in politics.
You stand for office and they'll look at your kids, your brothers, your
ex-girlfriends. Now that your search history is available to so many people, it
won't be that hard to look into that too. Your Orkut network, your old Usenet
messages, your searches, all of it." He loaded the cafetiere and depressed the
plunger, his face screwed up in solemn concentration. He held out his hand and
Greg got down two coffee mugs -- Google mugs, of course -- and passed them to
him.

"We're going to do for our friends just what Maya did for you. Just give them a
little cleanup. Preserve their privacy. That's all -- I promise you, that's
all."

Greg sipped the coffee, but didn't taste it. "And whichever candidates you
/don't/ clean --"

"Yeah," the guy said. "Yeah, you're right. It'll be tough for them."

"You can go now," Greg said.

"Oh, Greg," the guy said. He plucked his jacket off his chair-back and shrugged
it on, felt in the inside pocket and produced a small stack of paper, folded
into quarters. He smoothed it out and put it on the table.

Greg looked quickly and saw the rows of results he'd seen on the DHS man's
screen, back at the airport, when this all started. "I don't care," he said.
"Tell the world about my search history. Go ahead. In five years, everyone will
have had their search history ruptured. We'll all be guilty."

"It's not your history," the man said. He divided the stack into two piles, and
pointed to names on the top sheet of each. One was Maya's. The other was a
candidate whose campaign Greg had contributed to for the last three elections.

"You get five weeks' vacation a year. You can go to Cabo for the SCUBA. The
options package is very generous, too."

The man sat down and drank some coffee. Greg tried some more of his own. It
didn't taste so bad. It was, in fact, more delicious than anything that had
ever come out of his kitchen. The man knew what he was doing.

The best years of Greg's life had been spent at Google. Smart people. Amazing
work environment. Wonderful technology. Nothing in the world like it. When you
worked at G, you had the best model train set in the universe to play with.
Organizing all of human knowledge.

"You can pick your team, of course," the man said.

Greg poured himself another cup of delicious coffee.

#

The new Congress took eleven working days to pass the Securing and Enumerating
America's Communications and Hypertext Act, which authorized the DHS and the
NSA to outsource up to 80 percent of its intelligence and analysis work to
private contractors.

Theoretically, the contracts were open to a competitive bidding process, but
within the secure group at Google, in building 49, there was no question of who
would win those contracts. If Google had spent $15 billion on a program to
catch bad guys at the border, you can bet that they would have caught them --
governments just aren't equipped to Do Search Right.

Greg looked himself in the eye that morning as he shaved -- the security
minders didn't like hacker-stubble, and they weren't shy about telling you so
-- and realized that today was his first day as a de facto intelligence agent
in the US government.

How bad would it be? Wasn't it better to have Google doing this stuff than some
ham-fisted spook?

He had himself convinced by the time he parked at the Googleplex, among the
hybrid cars and bulging bike-racks. He stopped for an organic smoothie on the
way to his desk, then sat down and sipped.

The rumpled man hadn't been to the G since Greg went back to work, but it often
felt like his influence was all around them in building 49. He wasn't any less
rumpled today -- he could have been wrapped in saran-wrap on the day he brought
Greg back to work and refrigerated for all that he hadn't changed a hair.

"Hi, Greg," he said, sliding into the chair next to his. His podmates stood up
in unison and left the room.

"Just tell me what it is," Greg said. "Just spit it out. You want me to pwn
NORAD and start World War III, right?"

"Nothing so obvious," the man said, patting his shoulder. "Just a little
search-job."

"Yeah?"

"There's a person we want to find. A person who's left the country, apparently
headed for Mexico. She knows certain things that are, as of today, classified.
She needs to be briefed on her new responsibilities."

Greg stood up. "I'm not going to find Maya for you." He pulled on his jacket.

"There are plenty of people here who will. It's up to you, though. You can work
here with her, being productive, or you can find out just how rotten life can
get -- while she works here, being productive with your co-workers."

Greg stared at him, his hands balled into fists.

"Come on," the rumpled man said. "Greg, we both know how this goes. When you
said yes to me in your kitchen, you lost the option of saying no. It's not so
bad, is it? Who would you rather have doing the nation's intelligence: you and
your pals here in the Valley, or a bunch of straight-edge code-grinders in
Virginia?"

Greg turned on his heel and left. He made it all the way to the parking lot
before he stopped and kicked a wall so hard he felt something give way in his
foot.

Then he limped back to his desk, hung his jacket on his chair, and logged back
in.

#

It was a week later when his key-card failed to open the door to Building 49.
The idiot red LED shone at him every time he swiped it. He swiped it and swiped
it. Any other building and there'd be someone to tailgate on, people trickling
in and out all day. But the Googlers in 49 only emerged for meals, and
sometimes not even that.

Swipe, swipe, swipe.

"Greg, can I see you, please?"

The rumpled man hadn't shaved in a couple of days. He put an arm around Greg's
shoulders and Greg smelled his citrusy aftershave. It was the same cologne that
his divemaster in Baja had worn when they went out to the bars in the evening.
Greg couldn't remember his name. Juan-Carlos? Juan-Luis?

The man's arm around his shoulders was firm, steering him away from the door,
out onto the immaculate lawn, past the kitchen's herb garden. "We're giving you
a couple of days off," he said.

Greg felt a cold premonition that sank all the way to his balls. "Why?" Had he
done something wrong? Was he going to jail?

"It's Maya." The man turned him around, met his eyes with his bottomless
basset-hound gaze. "It's Maya. Killed herself. In Guatemala. I'm sorry, Greg."

Greg seemed to hurtle away from himself, to a place miles above, a Google Earth
view of the Googleplex, looking down on himself and the rumpled man as a pair
of dots, two pixels, tiny and insignificant. He willed himself to tear at his
hair, to drop to his knees and weep.

From a long way away, he heard himself say, "I don't need any time off. I'm
OK."

From a long way away, he heard the rumpled man insist.

But one-pixel Greg wouldn't be turned aside. The argument persisted for a long
time, and then the two pixels moved into Building 49 and the door swung shut
behind them.

--

*Afterword:*

This one came as a commission from /Radar/ magazine -- now defunct, a casualty
of the 2008 crash, but in 2007, this was the most widely circulated "lifestyle"
magazine in the US. They asked me to write about "the day Google became evil."
I didn't want to cheap out and just write about the company selling out to some
evil millionaire. If Google ever turned evil, it would be because a) evil had a
compelling business-model and b) evil lay at the end of a compelling technical
challenge.

I spent a lot of time talking off-the-record to Googlers, who are, to a one,
the nicest people I know (OK, one exception springs to mind, but let's not air
our dirty laundry in public, right?). I also had an incredibly productive
conversation with the Electronic Frontier Foundation's Kevin Bankston, a
profound and sharp-witted privacy lawyer.

I wanted to capture a company that was full of good people who do bad. There
are lots of these. For example, /all/ the Microsoft employees I know are
fantastic and smart and caring and principled. But ethically and technically,
most of what comes out of Redmond is a train-wreck. It's anti-synergy: a firm
that is far less than the sum of its parts. I could easily see Google turning
into that. I wish I understood how groups of good people trying to do good can
do bad.

~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-~-


----------------------------------------
HUMAN READABLE
--------------

/1. Nice networks don't go down/

It was unthinkable that the invisible ants that governed all human endeavor
should catastrophically fail, but fail they did, catastrophically, on the
occasion of Trish's eighth date with Rainer. It took nineteen seconds for the
cascade of errors to slow every car on the Interstate to a halt, to light up
the dashboard with a grim xmas tree of errors, to still the stereo and freeze
the tickers of information and context that they had come to think of as the
crawling embodiment of the colony that routed all the traffic that made up
their universe.

"We are going to be: So. Late," Rainer said, and Trish swiveled in her seat to
look at him. He was Fretting again, his forehead wrinkled and his hands
clenched on the steering wheel. When they traded massages (third date) and
she'd rubbed at his hands, she'd found them tensed into claws that crackled
with knuckle-fluid when she bent each finger back and rubbed sandalwood-scented
oil into it. He was mighty cute for a neurotic -- at least he knew it when he
was being nuts. Not that he'd stop being nuts, but he'd cheerfully admit it.

"We are not going to be late," she said. "We just need to manually route
ourselves out of the dead spot and get back on the grid and we'll be on our
way. We've got plenty of time."

"Dead spot?"

"Yes," she said. His forehead wrinkles were looking more klingon by the second.
"Dead spot." She forced a chuckle. "You didn't think that the whole world was
down, did you?"

He relaxed his knuckles. "Course not," he said. "Dead spot. Probably ends up at
the turn-off."

"Right," she said. "We need a map. I'm navigatrix. You're pilot. Tell me where
your maps are, then get onto the shoulder and drive straight."

"Where my maps are? Jesus, what century do you live in? My maps are with the
sextant and sundial, between my leeches and my obsidian sacrifice-knife."

She laughed. "OK, pal, I'll find a michelin, you drive. Every car has a couple
maps. They self-assemble from happy meal boxes." She opened the
glove-compartment and started rooting through it while he pulled onto the
shoulder and gunned the tiny two-seater along it.

"This is: So. Illegal," he said.

"Naw," she said. "I'm pretty sure you're allowed on the shoulder when the
routing goes down. It's in the written-test manual. Learned it while I was
helping my little cousin Leelee study. Aha!" she said, holding something up.

"You have a cousin named Leelee? That's uniquely horrible."

"Shut up," she said. "Look at this." It was an old-fashioned phone, of a
certain handsome retro line that made it look like a dolphin fucking a silver
dildo, the kind of thing marketed to old people who wanted a device with its
affordances constrained to collapse the universe of all possible uses for
things that fit into your hand into the much smaller universe of, say, a
cellphone.

"Yeah, my mom left that behind a couple years ago. I looked everywhere for it
but couldn't find it. She must've been snooping in the glove-box. Serves her
right. So what?"

"These things can unmesh and talk straight to a tower at a long distance, can't
they?"

"I dunno, can they?"

"Oh yes, they can. Which means that they work in dead spots. So we can call and
get directions."

"You think you're pretty smart, huh, dumpling?"

She put her finger to her temple and made an adorable frowny thinky face, and
held it until he looked at her and laughed. They'd discovered their ability to
make one another laugh when he'd farted while taking off his kilt (second date)
and had reflexively swung the hem back to make it appear that his mighty gust
was ruffling the pleats.

"What's your mom's number?" she said.

He recited it and she tapped it in.

"Hi there! This is Trish, Rainer's friend? We're on the way, but the, well the,
but the -- I mean to say, the grid's down or something. The car doesn't have
any nav system, the dolby's out, the Interstate's a parking-lot... Oh, you too?
God. Wonder if it's the whole country! So, we need directions from San Luis
Obispo, to the cemetery, if possible."

:...:

"Why yes, it's venti nice to be meeting /you/," she said. "I've heard a lot
about you, too. Yes, I'm giving directions, he's driving. Oh, that's so sweet
of you. Yes, he /does/ look like he's going to scrunch his forehead into his
upper lip. I think it's cute, too. Right. Got it. Left, then right, then left,
then a slight left, then up the hill. Got it. Whups! That's the duracell!
Better go. Soon! Yes. Whoops."

"So?" he said.

"So, your mom sounds nice."

"You got the directions?"

"She gave me directions."

"So you know where we're going?"

"I don't have a single, solitary clue. Your mother gives /terrible/ directions,
darling. Pull off at the next exit and we'll buy a map."

"We are going to be: So. Late."

"But now /they know/ we're late. We have an excuse. You: stop Fretting."

#

Once they were on the secondary roads, the creepiness of the highway full of
stopped cars and crane-necked drivers gave way to a wind-washed soughing
silence of waves and beach and palms. Trish rolled down the window and let the
breeze kiss the sweat off her lip, watching the surfers wiping out in the curl
as the car sped toward the boneyard.

"Are you /sure/ this is the kind of thing you're supposed to bring a date to?"

"Yes," he said. "Don't Fret. That's my job."

"And you don't think it's even a /little/ weird to take a girl to a cemetery on
a date?"

"We're not /burying/ anyone," he said. "It's just an unveiling."

"I still don't get that," she said. "I keep picturing your mom cutting a ribbon
with a giant pair of gold scissors."

"Right, let's take it from the top," he said. "And you'd better not be getting
me to talk to stop my Fretting, because appealing to my pedantic nature to
distract me is a /very/ cheap trick."

"I'm fluttering my eyelashes innocently," she said.

He laughed and stole a hand through the vent in her apron-trousers and over her
thigh. "Achtung!" she said. "Eyes on road, hands on wheel, mind in gutter,
/this instant!/" She put her hand over his and he put down the pedal. His hand
felt nice there -- too nice, for only eight dates and 20-some phone calls and
about 100 emails. She patted it again.

"This is kind of fun," he said, as they zipped past some surfer dudes staring
glumly at their long-boards' displays, their perfect tits buoyant and colored
like anodized aluminum with electric-tinted sun-paste.

"Ahem," Trish said, squeezing his hand tight enough to make his knuckles grind
together. "You were about to explain tombstone-unveiling to me," she said.
"When you got distracted by the athletic twinkies on the roadside. But I am
sweet-natured and good and forgiving and so I will pretend not to have seen it
and thus save us both the embarrassment of tearing out your Islets of
Langerhans, all right?" She fluttered her eyes innocently in a way that she
happened to know made him melt.

"Explaining! Yes! OK, remember, I'm not particularly Jewish. I mean, not that
my parents are, either: they're just Orthodox. They don't believe in God or
anything, they just like Biblical Law as a way of negotiating life. I renounced
that when I dropped out of Yeshiva when I was 12, so I am not an authority on
this subject."

"Let the record show that the witness declared his utter ignorance," she said.
"But I don't get this atheist-Orthodox thing either --"

"Just think of them as Mennonites or something. They find the old ways to be a
useful set of rules for navigating the universe's curves. God is irrelevant to
the belief."

"So they don't believe in God, but they pray to him?"

"Yeah," he said. The surfers were all coming in now, jiggling their boards and
rebooting them and staring ruefully at the radical cutback off the lip, dude,
gnarly, as they plodded up the beach. "The ritual is the important part.
Thinking good thoughts. Having right mind.

"It's good advice, most of it. It doesn't matter where it comes from or how it
got there. What matters is that if you follow the Law, you get to where you're
going, in good time, with little pain. You don't know why or how, but you do."

"It's like following the ants," she said, watching the stop-and-go traffic in
the other direction. "Don't know why they tell us to go where they do, but they
do, and it works."

"Well, I guess," he said, using the tone of voice that told her that he was
avoiding telling her how wrong she was. She smiled.

"/Anyway/. The thing about Jews -- ethnic Jews, cultural Jews, forget the
religion here -- is that we're pretty much on the melodramatic end of the
grieving scale. We like to weep and tear at our hair and throw ourselves on top
of the coffins, right? So there's like 5,000 years of this, and during that
time, a bunch of social scientists -- Rabbinical scholars -- have developed a
highly evolved protocol for ensuring that you grieve your dead enough that you
don't feel haunted by guilt for having failed to honor them, but not grieving
so much that you become a drag on the tribe.

"When someone dies, you bury him right away, usually within 24 hours. This
means that you spend an entire day running around like your ass was on fire,
calling everyone, getting the word out, booking last-minute travel, ordering in
from the caterers, picking out a box, fielding consoling phone-calls, getting
the rabbi on the phone, booking the limo, so much crap that you can't spare
even a second to fall to pieces. And then you bury him, and while you're at it,
your family extrudes a volunteer to go over to your house and take all the
cushions off of one of the sofas, hang sheets over all the mirrors, and set out
enough food to feed the entire state, along with an urn of starbucks the size
of an oil-drum.

"Before the service starts, the rabbi gives you a razor-blade and you slash a
hole in your lapel, so that you've got the rent in your heart hanging out there
in plain sight, and once you get back home, you spend /seven days/ grieving.
You pray two times a day with a quorum of ten men, facing east and singing the
Kaddish, this really, really depressing song-prayer-dirge that's specially
engineered to worm its way into the melancholy receptors of the Semitic
hindbrain and make you feel really, really, really miserable. Other people come
over and cook for you, all three meals. You don't see yourself in the mirrors,
you don't sit on cushions, you don't do anything /except mourn/ for a whole
week.

"Then it's over. You take a walk, leaving by one door and coming back in by the
other. You put the mourning behind you and start your new life without your
dear departed. You've given over your whole life for a whole week, done nothing
but mourn, and you're completely sick of it by then, so you're almost glad to
be done.

"Then, six months or a year later, usually just before Jewish New Year's, which
is in the fall, you have a tombstone erected at the gravesite. The
stone-cutters tie a white cloth around it, and everyone gathers there, and
there's a sermon, and that dirge again, and more prayer, and everyone has a
good hard cry as the scabs you've accumulated are ripped away and all your pain
comes back fresh and scalding, and you feel it all again in one hot second, and
realize with a guilty start that you /have/ been neglecting the memory of the
loved one, which is to say that you've gotten on with your life even though his
is over, which is to say that you've done perfectly healthy, normal stuff, but
you feel totally, completely overwhelmed with guilt and love, which are kind of
flipsides of the same emotion --"

"You don't believe that, do you?" She held her breath.

"Well, kind of. Not that they /should be/, but hell they /are/, most of the
time, then."

"Good thing we're not in love, then, right?" she said, in reference to their
sixth date, when they'd decided that they would hold off on any declarations of
love for at least an entire year, since they were most often moved to utter the
Three Words of Significance when they were besotted with e.g. post-orgasmic
brain-juice or a couple of cocktails.

"Yes, counselor."

She shook her head. He /knew/ she was an academic, not a practicing lawyer, but
he loved to tease her about it, ever since she'd revealed (after third date, on
the phone) that she'd spent about ten seconds in private practice after she'd
worked for her congressman and before she'd joined the faculty at UCLA.

"You're out of order," she said.

"This whole damned car is out of order!" he said. "So that's the ritual. You
/said/ you wanted to meet the parents and sisters and aunts and grandmothers
and cousins and uncles and nephews and in-laws the next time we all got
together. This is it."

"Right," she said. "I asked for this." And she had, of course. Hadn't asked for
the graveside elements, but she'd been curious to meet this big sprawling
enterprise of a family that he was always nattering on about. This seemed as
good an occasion as any. "So," she said. "Is this a traditional date among Your
People?"

He chuckled. "Yes, this is Yom Shiksa, the ritual bringing of the gentile woman
to the family so that she may become the subject of intense, relentless
scrutiny and speculation."

She started to laugh, then saw that the tractors were stilled in the fields
they were passing, that a train was stopped in its tracks, that the surfers
were unable to get their roll-cage dune-buggies to take to the road.

"You all right, babe?" he said, after a couple minutes of this.

"Just wondering about the dead spot," she said. "I wish we knew what had
happened."

"Nothing too bad, I'm sure," he said. "It's all self-healing. I'm sure we'll be
back online soon enough."

#

They rolled into the parking lot for his family's /shul/'s section of the giant
graveyard a few minutes after 1PM, just over an hour late, along with the
majority of the other attendees, all of whom had had to navigate manually.

"Where are your sisters?" Rainer's mother said, even before he'd kissed her
cheek.

Rainer screwed his face up in a scowl and dug in his pocket for a yarmulke. "Do
I know? Stuck in traffic, Ma. The grid's down everywhere."

Trish watched this bemusedly, in her cool loose cotton apron-trousers and
blouse. She scuffed her toe conspicuously and Rainer turned to her, and it was
as though he'd forgotten she was there. She felt a second's irritation, then a
wave of sympathy as she saw the spasm of anxiety cross his face. He was nervous
about her meeting his fam, and nervous about who would arrive when, and nervous
about where his sisters were with their enormous families and meek husbands,
trapped somewhere on southern California's squillion-mile freeway network.

"Ma," he said. "This is my friend, Trish."

"Pleased to meet you, Mrs. Feinstein," Trish said. The old woman was remarkably
well-preserved, her soft skin glowing with heat-flush, her thick hair caught in
a tight bun and covered with a little scarf that reminded Trish of Rainer's
yarmulke. She wondered if she should be wearing one, too. Mrs. Feinstein's eyes
flicked quickly to her shoes, up her legs and boobs, to her face and hair, and
then back to her face. She opened her arms and drew Trish into a hug that
smelled of good, subtle perfume, though Trish knew so little about scent that
she couldn't have said which. "Call me Reba, darling," she said. "It's so good
of you to come."

And then she was off, hustling to corral a wayward knot of horseplay-aged
cousins, stopping to shake hands with the deceased great-uncle's poker buddies
in their old-man pants, golf shirts and knit yarmulkes bobby-pinned to their
thinning hair.

Trish took stock. Looked like every other graveyard she'd been in, which wasn't
that many. At 35, she'd been to half a dozen family funerals, a couple of
college buddies who OD'ed or cracked up their cars, and one favorite poli-sci
teacher's service, so she was hardly an expert on boneyards, but something was
amiss.

"What's with the pebbles on the headstones?" she whispered to Rainer, who was
scanning the road for signs of his sisters.

"Huh? Oh. You drop those on the monument when you visit the grave, as a sign
that someone's been there."

"Oh," she said, and began to cast about for a pebble she could put on his
great-uncle's headstone once it was unveiled. There were none to be found. The
ground had been picked completely clean. Looking at the thousands and thousands
of ranged marble headstones, each topped with a cairn of stones -- and not just
stones, either, toys and seashells and small sculptures, she saw now -- and she
understood why.

"What are you doing?" Rainer asked. He might have been irritated, or just
nervous. It was hard to tell when he was Fretting, and he was clearly going
coo-coo for coco-puffs.

"Looking for pebbles," she said.

He said :fuck: very quietly. "I meant to bring some. Damnit. I've got twenty
relatives buried here and we're going to go past every single tombstone before
we get to leave and I don't have a single rock."

"Can you leave toys or other stuff, like on those stones?"

"Yeah," he said. "I suppose. If I had other stuff."

She opened her purse and pulled out the dolphin-dildo cellphone. "You still
need this?" she said.

He smiled and his forehead uncreased. "You're a genius," he said.

She set it down on the pavement and brought her heel down on it hard, breaking
it into dozens of fragments. "All the pebbles we'll ever need," she said,
picking them up and handing them to Rainer.

He put his arm around her shoulders and squeezed. "I'm awfully fond of you,
Counselor," he said, kissing her earlobe. His breath tickled her ear and made
her think of the crazy animal new-relationship-energy sex they'd had the night
before -- she was still limping, and so was he -- and she shivered.

"You too, steakypaste," she said. "Now, introduce me to all of your relatives."

"Introduce you?" He groaned. "You don't think I remember all of their names, do
you?"

#

Afterward, they formed a long convoy back to the nearest family member's house
-- a great aunt? a second cousin? Rainer was vague -- navigating by keeping
everyone in sight, snaking along the traffic jam that appeared to have engulfed
the entire state, if not the whole coast.

"You made that law, yes? We've all heard about you." This was the sixth time
someone had said this to her since they'd arrived and Rainer had made her a
plate of blintzes, smoked salmon, fresh bagels, boiled eggs, and baby greens
salad with raspberry dressing, then had been spirited away into an endless
round of cheek-pinching and intense questioning. She'd been left on her own,
and after having a couple of grave conversations with small children about the
merits of different toys, she'd been latched upon by one of the Relatives and
passed from hand to hand.

"I was involved in it, but I didn't write the law," she said.

"Look at you, so modest, you're blushing!" the Relative said. She reached out
to steady a cut-glass vase as it wobbled in the wake of two small boys playing
keep-away with a third's yarmulke, and Trish realized that this was probably
the hostess.

"This place is just supercalafragilistic," she said, with an economical gesture
at the tasteful Danish furnishings, the paper books in a handsome oak bookcase,
the pretty garden out one side window and the ocean out the back window.

"Thank you," the great-aunt said. "My Benny loved it here." She misted up.
Trish finally added two and two, remembered the BENJAMIN chiseled into the
marble headstone, and the blank spot on the other half of the tombstone,
realized that this wasn't just the hostess, this was the /widow/, and felt
about for a thing to say.

"It was a beautiful ceremony," she said. She had a couple napkins tucked in the
waistband of her pants, and without thinking, she extracted one and folded an
angle into it, reaching for the corner of the great-aunt's eye. "Look up," she
said, and blotted the tear before it could draw a line of mascara down the
widow's cheek.

The old woman smiled a well-preserved smile that reminded Trish of Rainer's
mom. "You're a sweet girl," she said. "Me, I'm not so good with names, and so
I've forgotten yours."

"I'm Trish," Trish said, bemusedly. Rainer's grammar got yiddishized when he
wasn't paying attention, and she adored the contrast between its shtetl
credibility and his witty, smooth public banter-persona. It had attuned her to
little phrases like, "Me, I'm not so good."

The widow shook her hand. "I'm Dorothy. It's a pleasure to make your
acquaintance. Would you like to come out to the garden with me?"

#

Once they were seated, young male Relatives materialized and set up
shade-umbrellas and brought out trays of iced juice.

"They're not after the inheritance, you know," the old woman said with a snort.
"Their parents are /very/ well-off. They don't need from money. They just adore
me because I've spoiled them rotten since they were babies and I'd take them
swimming and to Disneyland."

"You have a beautiful family," Trish said.

"Do you have a big family, too?" The old woman put on a pair of enormous
sunglasses and sipped at her pink grapefruit juice.

"Not like this one," she said. There were a couple hundred people in the house,
and Rainer had spent the whole car-ride back from the cemetery Fretting about
all the relations who /hadn't/ made it.

"Oh, this one! Well, this is a special case. This family accumulates other
families. My Benny had a small family, and when he married me, they just joined
us. All the high holidays, we ate here, or at my parents' place, God rest them.
Your family is in DC?"

"All over."

"But you're from DC, no?"

"Not really. I grew up in Chicago and Seattle."

"But you made that law --"

"I really didn't, honestly! I was clerking for a Supreme Court judge when the
case was heard, and I wrote his dissenting opinion, and when we lost, I quit
and went to work for a PAC that was agitating for copyright reform to
accommodate free expression, and then when Senator Sandollar got voted in and
they started the Intellectual Property committee and made her chairman, I
joined her staff as a policy wonk. So I worked on it, along with a couple
thousand other people, not counting the millions who contributed to the
campaign and the people who knocked on doors and so on."

"How old are you, darling?"

"35," she said.

"At 35, I was having babies. You -- listen to you. Listen to what you've
/accomplished/! I'm proud just to /listen/ to you. Rainer is lucky to have you.
You two will get married?"

Trish squirmed and felt her face grow hot. Neither of them really believed in
marriage. Whenever anyone brought the subject up around Rainer, he'd grimace
and say, "Are you kidding? It'd make my mother /far/ too happy -- she'd keel
over from joy."

There was some kind of disturbance down the beach, one that had been growing
steadily over the past several minutes, and now the Relatives were all turning
their attention that way, to a couple of small boys in miniature suits who were
ruining the shine on their shoes running in the sand like lunatics.

Something in the way they were running, the distant expressions she couldn't
quite make out on their faces. It made her think back to high-school, to
working as a beach lifeguard on Lake Michigan in the summers, and before she
knew what she was doing, she'd kicked off her shoes and was running for the
shore, her legs flashing immodestly through the vents in her apron-trousers.

She was still yards away from the hissing surf when she began to assess the
situation. There was the small boy, bobbing in the ocean, where the undertow
had spit him up after sucking him under. There was the swimmer, unconscious on
the beach, face down. Couldn't tell if his chest was moving, but the small boy
was in a suit, not swim-trunks like the swimmer, and that meant that he was
part of Rainer's Family, which she had begun (on the eighth date, no less!) to
think of as her own, and so she had him as her primary target before she
reached the sea.

She didn't bother finicking with the buttons on her top, just grabbed her
collar and yanked, leaving her in a bra that revealed less than some bikinis
she owned, but did so through a cunning arrangement of lace, mesh, and
structural engineering that was probably illegal in Texas. She undid the bows
on each hip holding up her pants and stepped out of them, leaving behind a very
small pair of white panties whose primary design consideration had been to
avoid showing lines through thin trousers, with modest coverage of all her
nethers coming in a distant second.

She plunged into the water without hesitation, moving swiftly but surely,
taking care to keep her feet dug in against the undertow as she waded out
toward the young boy. She was a strong swimmer, but the water was shockingly
cold after the heat of the garden and the buzzing afternoon and it sucked at
her calves and legs like a jacuzzi intake. Her breath roared in her ears as she
rode the swells, and then she was soaked by a succession of breakers, and then
she had the boy's little hand.

She hauled him to her, seeing that he was only five or six, and that his
pouting lips were alarmingly blue and that his skin was as pale as cream. She
scooped the water out of his mouth, hooked her arm around his neck and tilted
his head back and began to slosh back toward shore. When she was waist-deep --
immodestly revealed in a bra that she was quite certain had gone completely
transparent -- she pinched his nose and blew into his mouth, not quite getting
her mouth out of the way before he vomited up a gush of salt-water, blintzes,
diet coke, and bile. She spat and wished that she could duck her head and get a
mouthful of ocean to rinse with, but she couldn't without dunking the boy, too,
so she hauled him up out of the water and handed him to the Relative who was
standing with his arms on the shore, his fine leather shoes soaked with cold
seawater.

She looked for the swimmer, and saw that he was still face-down in the sand.
"You, you and you," she said, pointing at three young cousins whose wide eyes
were flicking from her boobs to her crotch -- white underwear, Christ, why
white underwear today? -- to the boy on the sand, who was mobbed now with
Relatives whose hubbub had reached deafening proportions, "Go to the house,
find an old-fashioned phone and call emergency services. Tell them where we
are, and that we have two drowning victims, one a child, neither breathing.
What are you going to do?"

The tallest of the three managed to make eye-contact long enough to say, "Find
a cell-phone, call emergency, tell them where we are, two drownings, not
breathing."

"Right," she said. "Come back when you're done and tell me that it's done."

"You, you," she said, picking out two tall uncles who looked like they'd worked
out or played sports before they found whatever careers had paid for the nice
suits they were wearing, "Carry him here and lay him down on his side."

She looked for Rainer and found his ass sticking out of the scrum around the
boy. She snagged him by the belt and dragged him back. "Rainer," she shouted.
His forehead was scrunched, but he was clear-eyed and grim and looked like he
was listening to her, which she found very pleasing. "You need to get everyone
back at least five steps from that kid, and make them quiet down," she said.

"Right," he said, and took off his jacket and handed it to her.

"Hold it yourself," she snapped, "I've got things to do."

"It's to wear," he said.

She surprised herself with a grin. "Thanks,"

The Relatives were murmuring, or crying, or bickering, but Rainer /hollered/.
"LISTEN UP," he said. "All of you get over there by that rock, NOW, or my
girlfriend won't be able to save Jory's life. GO!"

And they went, amazingly, crushing back so quickly they looked like a receding
tide. The tall uncles deposited the swimmer in the sand between them, and she
checked his breathing and saw that it was good.

"Turn him on his side and tell me if he starts to choke," she said, and turned
to the little boy, struggling to remember her rescue breathing.

#

She got the boy breathing and ended up with more puke on her face, on Rainer's
jacket, in her hair. His pulse was thready but there. She turned to the swimmer
and saw that he was a muscular surfer dude in board shorts with a couple of
bitchun tatts and a decent body-paint job. He was breathing, too, but his heart
was erratic as hell. She pressed two fingers to his throat.

"What happened?" she said. "Who saw it happen?"

One of the aunts stepped forward and said, "My son says they were playing --"

She held up her hand. "Where's your son?" she said.

"He's back at the house," the aunt said, startling back.

"Send someone for him, then tell me what happened."

The aunt looked like she'd been slapped, but the other Relatives were staring
at her and so she had to talk, and then the boy arrived and he told it again
and it was pretty much the same story, but she was able to get more details, as
she began to examine both the boy and the surfer's bodies for cuts, bruises,
breaks and punctures. She gave the boy's clothes the same treatment she'd given
her own, gently but forcefully tearing them off, using a seashell to start the
tears at first, then a pocket-knife that someone put in her hand.

The story was that the kids had been playing when they'd seen the surfer
floating in the breakers, and they'd dared each other to fish him out, and the
undertow had sucked them out to sea. One had gotten away, the other had ended
out beyond the waves, and meanwhile, the surfer had beached himself on his own.

"Right," she said. "Blankets and pillows. Elevate their feet and wrap them up
good." She stood up and staggered a step or two before Rainer caught her, and
the crowd made a noise that was at once approving and scandalized.

"Get me to the sea," she said. "I need to soak my head."

So he walked her into the water, he still in his suit-pants and dress shirt and
tie, and held onto her while she dunked her head and swirled a mouthful of salt
water in her mouth.

"Where are the fucking paramedics?" she said, as she sloshed back out with him.

"There," he said, and pointed at the horizon, where a Coast Guard clipper was
zooming for the shore. "The cell-phone was dead, so I fired up a couple flares.
You didn't hear them?"

"No," she said. He could have set off a cannon and she wouldn't have noticed
it.

She got back to the shore just in time to see the surfer convulse. She was on
him in a second, kneeling at his side, doing airway-breathing-circulation
checks, finding no pulse, and slamming him onto his back and beginning CPR.

Some time later, she was lifted off him and two paramedics went to work on him.
Someone put a robe over her shoulders and a cup of juice in her hands. She
dropped the juice in the sand and sticky liquid and beach sand covered her
legs, which she realized now that she hadn't depilated in a week, and that made
her realize that she'd spent a pretty crucial amount of time prancing around
naked in front of her date's family, and that that was probably not on the
timetable until the fifteenth date at /least/.

She looked up at Rainer, who was still in his shoes and as she was in bare feet
loomed over her. "God," she said, "Rainer --"

He kissed her. "I love you, Patricia," he said.

from: http://craphound.com/walh/e-book/browse-all-versions

"Ooh," she said, with a weak smile. "You're breaking the rules!"

"Can you let it go this once?"

She made her scrunchy thinky face and then nodded. "Just don't make a habit of
it, you lunk."

#

It would have been perfect if only the surfer hadn't died.

They didn't get home until well after midnight. Parts of LA appeared to be on
fire as they inched their way along the freeway. It was weird to see LA at this
speed. They were used to clipping along at 60 or 70 -- over 80 if the traffic
was light -- flying over the freeway so fast that the scenery was just a blur.
Only the year before, the /New Yorker/ had run a 40-page paean to LA, a public
apology declaring it the most livable city in America, now that it had licked
its traffic problems. It balanced lots of personal space with thorough
urbanization and urbanity. It was why they both lived there.

Now they seemed to have traveled back 50 years in time, to the bad old
traffic-jam-and-smog days. Looters danced below, torching stores, and the
traffic moved so slowly that some people were apparently abandoning their cars
to /walk/ home -- which made the traffic even worse. The smoke from the fires
turned the sunset into a watercolor of reds and mustards and golds, tones that
had blown away with the smog when the last gas-sucking Detroitmobile was
retired for a plastic Nickel-Metal Hydride jellybean, and all the lanes were
repainted to cut them in half.

It was nightmarish. When they got off the ramp at Studio City, they found
homeless guys directing traffic with gas-tubes they'd torn out of the
bus-shelters. The tubes glowed in the presence of microwave radio-frequency
radiation, and as each of the trillions of invisible ants in the system
attempted to connect with its neighbors and get the traffic set to rights
again, the RF noise made the tubes glow like sodium lamp
